Only one way to stop the meddling Brussels elite

2016-06-21

GETTY - STOCK

Among the reasons cited by Professor David Blake, director of the Pensions Institute at the Cass Business School, is the "overwhelming volume of law and regulation issued by the EU each year".

Moreover research from Vote Leave has also shown that pension firms will take a £328million hit as a result of Brussels proposals designed to hand further control over the industry to unelected EU bureaucrats.

 The only way to stop them meddling in our lives is by voting Leave

The pitfalls facing the pensions industry are far from unique.

Only yesterday this newspaper revealed fears that the EU is plotting to force the British Government to levy VAT on items that are currently exempt. And a decision on whether to outlaw high-energy models of household appliances such as kettles, toasters and hair dryers is due to be made in the autumn.

The Eurocrats are constantly seeking to extend their own influence and to implement an ever-greater number of damaging regulations. They will never change their ways and experience has proved that there is no chance of reforming the system.

The only way to stop them meddling in our lives is by voting Leave.

--------------------------------------------------



GETTY

Wrong to believe them all

AN unaccompanied asylum seeker has won the right to claim damages after an immigration officer refused to believe that he was under the age of 18. The Sudanese migrant, known only as AA, was detained as a result of the official's suspicions even though as a minor he should have been released.

This ruling by the High Court is deeply worrying. There have been a number of cases of migrants falsely claiming to be children in a bid to get softer treatment from the authorities. It is common sense to presume that a sizeable proportion of those who say they are under 18 will be lying. Officials should be encouraged to treat such claims with suspicion, not forced to take every migrant at their word.





Rulings of this nature from judges obsessed with human rights and political correctness only make it harder for the authorities to get a grip on the problem of illegal immigration.

--------------------------------------------------

Cliff's side of the story

TOMORROW an interview between Gloria Hunniford and Sir Cliff Richard will be aired on television. He has been treated appallingly by the police and it is disgraceful the way in which they hounded an innocent man. We can only hope that the chance to tell his side of the story will help him find closure.

