Tory MP forced to agree with Corbyn that there can be NO LIMIT on immigration

2016-06-20

On Sunday Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn told the Andrew Marr Show, Britain could not put a ceiling on immigration while still being part of the EU.

When directly asked whether it was right there can be no be upper limit on net migration from the EU, Nick Herbert admitted it was part of the "fundamental freedoms of the EU" that people have the right to work in the UK.

He told Jo Coburn on BBC Daily Politics: "But it is not a right to claim.

"And we do have full control of those non-EU migrants and we control our borders.

"Just as Germany and France and Spain can’t stop UK nationals from living and working in the EU.

BBC•GETTY

"That is part of being in the single market."

Mr Herbet, campaigning for Remain, said leaving the single market would damage Britain’s economy and reduce the numbers of jobs available to young people.

Katie Hoey, who is a leading Brexiteer, responded saying: "This idea that somehow the only part of the world who is doing this right is the 28 countries in the EU when the rest of the world manages to have trade and free trade deals without the political structure that goes with it."

On Sunday, Mr Corbyn was asked whether it was possible to place a limit on net migration numbers while remaining in the EU.

He said: "I don’t think you can have one while you have a free movement of labour – and I think the free movement of labour means that you have to balance the economy so you have to improve living standards and conditions.

"And so that means the EU’s appalling treatment of Greece... that is a problem. If you deliberately lower living standards and increase poverty in certain countries in south-east or eastern Europe then you’re bound to have a flow of people looking for somewhere else to go."

 That is part of being in the single market

Tory MP Nick Herbert

Mr Corbyn added: "It’s the very principle of a single market across Europe, is the free movement of people. If you have the free movement of capital you should also have the free movement of people."

Responding Vote Leave chair Gisela Stuart said: "The In campaign have no answers how we can control immigration if we stay in the EU.

"They have no plan for how we will fund the NHS so it can cope with the extra pressures that staying in the EU will create."

Brexit campaigners have called for an Australian-style points-based system.

Critics have argued Australia actually has higher net migration than Britain.

