Britain should LEAVE the EU, Britons are clueless, blasts Dutch commentator

2016-06-22

AFP GETTY

Joris Luyendijk said it is time for the European Union (EU) to show Britain the door, claiming an “amicable divorce” would be in the best interests of everyone on the eve of the historic EU referendum. 

Having lived in the UK for five years Mr Luyendijk claims the British public have “a mix of clueless indifference and self-imposed ignorance” towards the EU and Europe.

In a scathing comment piece for Dutch newspaper NRC, Mr Luyendijk, argues Britain has benefitted from being a member of the 28-country bloc while at the same time undermining it from within. 

 The EU should kindly show the UK the door

Joris Luyendijk

The Dutch writer said: “The EU should kindly show the UK the door. For years now London has benefited in two ways: from being members of the club and then undermine and blackmail them at the same time from the inside. 

“At the referendum it is likely that a small majority will vote to remain in the EU.

"This game of doubles will then pass through during a time when the EU can only survive if it gets reformed from the ground up.

"Something that requires members who act honestly and keep an open mind.

"Therefore it is better if the EU and UK part ways as friends.”

Mr Luyendijk, who has written for The Guardian as a financial reporter, admits the EU is on the verge of collapse and in desperate need of reform. 

GETTY

GETTY

He said: “Enough is enough. During normal times the British sabotage was irritating but tolerable. But we're not living in normal times anymore. 

“The EU is not in a crisis, the EU is about to collapse. Schengen isn't working, the Euro doesn't work.

"And the EU simply isn't democratic in its current form. A democratic EU would mean citizens could decide what they want from the EU in elections.

“Which just isn’t the case at the moment. No, European voters should periodically be able to validate what is going on behind the scenes and is negotiated between the technocrats of the European Commission, the superior-appointed lobby of industry, the European Parliament and their Prime Minister or President.

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

“Maybe the refugee crisis will prove to be unmanageable, the euro-rescue and a truly democratic EU to be an illusion. But the question every European should ask themselves is whether they'd rather throw the towel, or whether now is the time to work together on project Europe.” 

In a continuation of Project Fear the Dutchman claims Britain would never recover financially in the event of Brexit, but thinks the EU should remain on friendly terms with the UK. 

He said: “The British benefit economically from their membership with the EU, so much so that they would probably never recover.

“Let Europe therefore be the wise one. Let's stop with the wishful thinking, the belief the English ever want to hear from us, and let us say goodbye to the dogma that no one should ever leave the EU. An amicable divorce. Wouldn't that be in the best interest of everyone?”

