EU referendum TV debates: What time is Channel 4's debate TONIGHT? What you need to know

2016-06-22

Getty

Jeremy Paxman will present a final debate live on Channel 4 on the eve of the Referendum for anyone who has not yet made up their minds.  

Channel 4 said: “Waverers and those still to decide which way to vote, will hear from a wide range of well-known and passionate guests including leading politicians, opinion formers and other high profile pro and anti-protagonists.”

EU REFERENDUM: WHAT ARE THE KEY DATES?

The BBC held a live debate at Wembley Arena at 8pm on Tuesday June 21, just two days before the EU referendum on Thursday June 23. 

The Brexit campaign put forward leading Tory Boris Johnson, Labour MP Gisela Stuart and energy minister Andrea Leadsom.

On the Remain side, there was London Mayor Khan, Scottish Conservative leader Ruth Davidson and Frances O'Grady of the Trades Union Congress.



Prime Minister David Cameron refused to take part in the debate because he does not want to go head-to-head with Tory Eurosceptics. 

Mr Cameron was accused of being 'lily-livered' over his decision not to stand against Brexit campaigner Mr Johnson.

The debate on June 21 was hosted by Question Time star David Dimbleby, Today’s Mishal Husain and Newsnight presenter Emily Maitlis.  

Mr Cameron and UKIP leader Nigel Farage faced separate 30-minute question and answer sessions during the show on June 7. 

The programme was hosted by ITV newsreader Julie Etchingham. WHO IS JULIE ETCHINGHAM? 

Vote Leave, which is backed by Mr Johnson and Michael Gove, had criticised ITV’s decision not pit Mr Campaign against one of its own representatives. 

A spokesman said: "ITV has accepted the Prime Minister's demands without even discussing it with the official campaign and has allowed the Prime Minister to dictate his own opponent.”

David Cameron was grilled on Sky News during its first live programme on the EU referendum on Thursday June 2. 

Eurosceptic Justice Secretary and Vote Leave supporter Michael Gove faced questions on the second programme on Friday June 3.

Pros and cons of Brexit

Leading players in the EU referendum campaigns clashed during the Express Debate at Express HQ in London on Friday June 2. 

Ukip leader Nigel Farage, Conservative MP Jacob Rees-Mogg and Labour MP Kate Hoey made the case for Brexit.

Labour MPs Chuka Umunna and Siobhain McDonagh and Innocent Smoothies co-founder Richard Reed argued the Remain case.



