Brexit: Which country has the most to lose now that Britain has voted to leave the EU?

2016-06-24

Getty Shutterstock

Ireland is the country that is set to be most affected by Brexit aftershocks, according to an index from Standard and Poor’s rating agency S&P Global Ratings. 

A report on the index, titled Who Has the Most to Lose from Brexit?, identified small financial services centres like Malta as particularly vulnerable in the event of Brexit.    

It said: “Ireland, Malta, Luxembourg, and Cyprus are in the frontline of economies susceptible to any trade and migratory aftershocks from a decision by the UK.” 

The Brexit Sensitivity Index, released by S&P, ranks 20 countries based on migrant flows, exports to the UK, foreign direct investment here and financial sector claims on UK institutions.  

Canada and Switzerland were the only non-EU countries included the index, which also featured Nordic countries and major European players such as France and Germany.  

Ireland is forecast to be hardest hit due to its shared history and common border with the UK, which has led to the significant trade and huge migration between the countries. 



Standard and Poor's Financial Services 

The “significant reverberations” to the Irish economy would depend on what kind of economic relationship it could forge with post-Brexit Britain, according to S&P. 

“The uncertainty regarding its new trade and migratory agreements with Europe would take its toll on flows of merchandise, services, and human capital, along the Republic of Ireland's 499-kilometre border with the UK,” the report said.   

“Ireland's financial sector exposure to the UK is also important, reflecting the size of Irish banking subsidiaries operating in the UK.”

But the index also took into account the fact that Ireland was well placed to attract some of the foreign direct investment displaced out of Britain after the EU exit.  

Brexit is also forecast to have a big impact on the economies of small financial services centres such as Malta and Cyrus, both of which have a historic link to the UK. 

S&P said: “Their attractive climates have drawn a large population of UK pensioners, on top of tourism receipts from the UK. Cyprus also has a very large expat population working in the UK.”

Malta has “very sizeable claims” on UK financial institutions and high exports, many of which are rebooked through Luxembourg for tax purposes, according to S&P. 

12 reasons why you should vote IN or OUT of EU

The index also included Switzerland, which has large FDI holdings in the UK, and Spain, which is a popular destination for British tourists and expats.  

S&R said: “Spain has large financial and FDI exposures to the UK, in particular through its large retail banking subsidiaries and telecom operations."

Standard and Poor's Financial Services 

The Swiss Franc and Nordic currencies were described as “particularly vulnerable to flight-to-quality appreciation pressures” when Britain leaves the EU. 

