Brexit: What will happen to the NHS now Britain has voted to leave the EU?

2016-06-24

Shutterstock Getty

The Leave campaign argues that Brexit could save the NHS by redirecting funding from the EU budget and cutting immigration to reduce pressure on services.

But the Remain camp has warned that Brexit could result in an NHS staffing crisis and aftershocks on the economy would reduce funding for healthcare. 

Other commentators - including Marek Sacha, CEO of online home care agency Revere Care, - have argued that both sides used the NHS to their political advantage. 



Mr Sacha said: “As Brexit scaremongering has taken a turn for the worse, our health care system finds itself, yet again, at the centre of the battle. 

“Whilst some argue that Brexit could save the NHS, others say it’d ruin it; but the fact that party leaders have become so desperate for votes that they’re hiding behind Britain's health system is shocking.” 

Here is a look at what could happen to Britain’s beloved national healthcare system after the public backed Brexit in the EU referendum. 

Reuters

The Leave side has argued that Brexit would allow Britain to invest more in the NHS because it would no longer have to contribute to the EU budget.

Eurosceptic doctor and former minister MP Andrew Murrison said that post-Brexit Britain could spend more on doctors, nurses and hospital beds. 

He said: “Our NHS is under pressure from increasing demand and the fact that we have finite resources. If we vote leave we can spend some of the money we set aside for Brussels on the NHS.” 

But pro-EU campaigners and the government have warned that Brexit would actually result in economic shocks, leading to less funding for the NHS and healthcare services. 

This month Tory MP Dr Sarah Wollaston defected from Vote Leave to the Remain side after rejecting Eurosceptic claims that Brexit would help the NHS. 

Dr Wollaston told the BBC: "The consensus now is there would be a huge economic shock if we voted to leave.  

“Undoubtedly, the thing that's most going to influence the financial health of the NHS is the background economy. So I think there would be a Brexit penalty."

The Remain camp has warned that leaving the EU will lead to further shortages of key NHS staff such as nurses and care workers.

About 55,000 out of the 1.2 million NHS staff in England are citizens of other EU countries, according to the NHS’s electronic staff record for September 2015.

But leaving the EU would result in the end to the free movement of migrant workers, including healthcare professionals, between the continent and the UK. 

Mr Sacha, of Revere Care, warned that Britain turning its back on the EU was likely to reduce healthcare spending and create more “cracks in our already damaged health system”.

He added: “Furthermore, the idea that tens of thousands of care workers having to pack their bags and leave is a massive worry for the care system at large.”





A key argument of Brexit campaign is high levels of immigration will continue to put pressure on public services such as the NHS, unless Britain left the EU.  

Eurosceptic cabinet minister Michael Gove warned that the NHS faces growing demand due soaring EU migration in the future, especially after countries like Turkey join the EU. 

Mr Gove argued that there would have been a rise in A&E attendances and waiting times, adding: “Free movement on that scale will have huge consequences for the NHS.”

