Nigel Farage dismisses racism claims over Ukip's new EU referendum poster

2016-06-16

PA

The Ukip leader this morning unveiled a new poster outside the EU’s offices in Westminster, with an image of migrants entering Europe last year emblazoned with the slogan ‘Breaking Point’ and the message ‘The EU has failed us’.

The poster was met with anger by Remain campaigners, with Labour MP Tristam Hunt claiming he was “absolutely appalled” by the “divisive, hate-filled” advert.

The former shadow education secretary said leading Brexit campaigners such as Boris Johnson and Michael Gove should “be ashamed to be on the same platform” as Mr Farage.

But Mr Farage hit back at claims voters could view the poster as racist.

Speaking in front of the advert, the Ukip leader said: “This is a photograph, an accurate undoctored photograph taken on October 15 last year following German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s call in the summer.

“If you believe, as I’ve always believed, that we should open our hearts to genuine refugees that’s one thing.

“But frankly, as you can see from this picture, most of the people coming are young males.

“They may be coming from countries that are not in a very happy state, they may be coming from places that are poorer than us but the EU has made a fundamental error that risks the security of everybody.”

GETTY

GETTY

 This is a photograph, an accurate undoctored photograph taken on October 15 last year following German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s call in the summer.

Nigel Farage

The anti-Brussels campaigner argued that under the 1951 United Nations definition of a refugee “very few people that came into Europe last year actually qualify as genuine refugees.”

Blasting Mrs Merkel’s decision to “have literally opened up the door unconditionally” to Syrian refugees last year “without being able to securely check anybody” Mr Farage said Europe was now at greater risk of terror attacks.

He added: “We’ve just had in the last two weeks the Dusseldorf bomb plot has been uncovered. 

“A very, very worrying plan for mass attacks along the style of Paris or Brussels. All of those people came into Germany last year posing as refugees.

“When ISIS say they will use the migrant crisis to flood the continent with their jihadi terrorists they probably mean it.”

Challenged over the fact Britain is not part of Europe’s borderless Schengen Area and has therefore not been affected by the waves of people travelling across the continent during last year’s migration crisis, Mr Farage insisted the poster was making the point “the EU has failed us all”.

He said: “This is a statement about the whole of the EU and politically I do think the EU is at breaking point.

Mr Farage added: “This referendum may be about the UK but believe you me there are tens of millions of people right across Europe cheering us on.

“The EU has made a complete mess of the eurozone and plunged Mediterranean countries into poverty.

“The EU’s common asylum policy and the Merkel call last year has led to a massive increase in euroscepticism and a heightened terror risk for everybody.”

Speaking later as the Ukip battle bus travelled past the Houses of Parliament and Downing Street followed by a string of vans displaying the poster, Mr Farage said there had been a surge in support for Brexit over the last fortnight.

An Ipsos Mori poll today showed Leave ahead by six points over Remain, excluding undecided voters.

He said: “I’m feeling better about things than I was two weeks ago, there has been momentum towards the Leave vote of that there’s no question.

“With a week to go, a week’s long time, this could still go either way but we really are, the Leave side now, really are in with a very serious chance.”



Dismissing the ‘Project Fear’ campaign run by the Remain camp, Mr Farage said: “Our arguments are getting through.

“I also think the more the Chancellor, the more the Prime Minister say things that are patently untrue, the more a turnoff that is for the public.”

Mr Farage said Ukip will unveil a new poster every day in the last week of campaigning ahead of Britain’s historic in/out vote on EU membership in the party’s “biggest ever advertising campaign”.

He brushed off suggestions he could be offered a peerage in the House of Lords after the referendum, insisting there are “no other thoughts in my mind” other than Britain quitting the EU on June 23.

