Yet MORE Tory donors condemn Cameron for his ‘BULLYING’ and ‘THREATENING’ EU campaign

2016-06-17

GETTY

Four donors, who have collectively given the party more than £8.5million, condemned Cameron for using scaremongering tactics to entice voters into staying in the EU.

Senior Tories now fear it will be impossible to repair the divisions that have been exposed within the party during the heated EU referendum debate – with donor Edi Trull insisting Cameron will not be able continue as Prime minister no mater what the outcome.

Mr Truell, who has pumped £279,000 into the Tory party since 2010, said he could no longer back the Conservatives under Cameron.



 He was brought up on the playing fields of Eton and he should know that it matters not whether you won or lost, but how you played the game

Edi Truell

When asked if he thought the Prime Minister should stand down, the donor said: “I think so. We’ve all tried very hard to warn David about this. We feel very let down.

“He was brought up on the playing fields of Eton and he should know that it matters not whether you won or lost, but how you played the game.

“This was meant to be a level playing field referendum. He is behaving in a way that is contrary to what he promised and abusing the machinery of Government to support the Remain case.”

GETTY

Lord Farmer, a former Tory treasurer and one of the party’s most generous backers, said he is saddened by the “intimidating, threatening and bullying” campaign deployed by Downing Street.

He said: “I think that it is shared by many other Conservatives as well.

“I think the damage done is not going to be easily repaired afterwards.

“People like myself will try to build bridges and bring everybody back together, but I think there is an awful lot of damage done.”

GETTY

Lord Farmer added: “Everyone knows renegotiation delivered little, so they never mention it now. In a way, that is a deceit thing.

"And there seems to be an awful lot of purposeful exaggerations, purposeful ambiguities, which have actually done a huge damage to the political body in this country.”

David Lilley, Lord Farmer’s business partner, donated £318,400 to the Conservatives since 2013.

He slated George Osborne’s assertion that he would need to find £30billion if Britain left the EU, branding it “not credible”.



Jeremy Hosking, a fund manager who has given the Conservative party more than £500,000 is also seething about Cameron calling Brexit supporters “quitters”.

He said: “Taking 60 per cent of your supporters and telling them they are quitters and unpatriotic – it can’t be helpful.

"I think there are reasonable questions to be answered by the government as to why the prime minister, who was jauntily neutral seven months ago, has turned into this messianic figure.

