Jeremy Corbyn's friend blasts his EU turnaround after 40 YEARS of Brexit campaigning

2016-06-22

GETTY 

Mr Corbyn’s own friend and colleague John Sweeney has turned on the veteran left-winger to describe his astonishment of Corbyn’s dramatic change in attitude since voting to leave the European Economic Community in the 1975.

Mr Sweeney, Labour Go spokesperson and trade unionist, said Corbyn’s anti-EU stance soon changed after he became leader of the Labour Party.

Mr Sweeney, who is a member of Mr Corbyn’s Islington North constituency and has known him for many years, said: "Jeremy Corbyn, John McDonnell and Dennis Skinner and these other pillars of left wing politics in Britain, were always voting together in every lobby.

“In fact they were in the lobby in the referendum in 1975, against Maastricht, against Lisbon, they were denouncing the EU and all of its works until a year ago.

GETTY 

12 reasons why you should vote IN or OUT of EU

 For him to remain on the sidelines in Britain’s first referendum on EU membership in over 40 years is a total abdication of deeply felt principles and beliefs

John Sweeney

“Jeremy saw the conflict between socialism and the EU, voting for Leave in 1975, and he spent 32 years proudly voting against the EU in Parliament, which only stopped on his ascension to leader.

“For him to remain on the sidelines in Britain’s first referendum on EU membership in over 40 years is a total abdication of deeply felt principles and beliefs.”

Corbyn’s approach to the EU referendum has somewhat been watered down, prompting Leave campaigners to remain unconvinced saying he has been forced to “whitewash” his long-held Eurosceptic attitudes while pro-EU Labour MPs have called for him to take a more high-profile role in the campaign.

Yesterday he appeared to hit out at Brussels for overruling Britain’s sovereignty, shielding tax havens and its “appalling” handling of the migrant crisis in a bizarre televised Q&A in which he was meant to defend the 28-nation bloc.

GETTY 

GETTY 

Corbyn has expressed Eurosceptic arguments in the past, in 1993 he spoke out against the Maastrichht Treaty which established the EU and move towards a political and economic union. 

He also voted against the Lisbon Treaty in 2008 and said the EU had “always suffered a serious democratic deficit”.

