Working class revolution? Reports of huge EU referendum turnout which ‘would favour Leave'

2016-06-24

REUTERS

Polling stations in key areas including the Midlands and northern English towns could hit record levels of 80 per cent or higher, according to electoral insiders overseeing the count. 

Experts have calculated that a very large turnout could boost the chances of Brexit because it indicates that traditionally disenfranchised voters, who largely come from white, working class communities, have headed to the polling booths en masse. 

And earlier today key Brexit campaigner Boris Johnson said: "From what I have heard and all the information is that turnout is good in areas where we need it to be."

Pre-referendum has consistently shown that voters from low-income brackets are far more likely to vote to Leave the European Union than to Remain, with immigration and the undercutting of wages a key point of contention. 

AFP

GETTY

Such groups are traditionally seen as less likely to turn out and vote, but if they have taken part in the referendum en masse their influence could propel Britain out of the EU exit door. 

Details emerged during the day of potentially huge turnouts in crunch areas for the Leave camp, but Express.co.uk was prevented from reporting them by strict purdah rules designed to protect the integrity of the vote. 

However, now that polls have closed we can reveal indications that officials have been stunned by voter turnout in key districts which could swing the result decisively towards Brexit. 

And today’s torrential downpours do not appear to have dampened people’s enthusiasm to take part in the historic referendum, despite suggestions rain could hit the numbers taking part. 

Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), makes a statement after Britain voted to leave on the European Union

 From what I have heard and all the information is that turnout is good in areas where we need it to be

Boris Johnson

A pro-Brexit councillor in Wigan - a staunch Labour heartland - said earlier that he was “stunned” by the turnout of working class voters, saying it was “no longer a case of if we will win Wigan but by how much”.

He told the website townhall.com: “If we have won Wigan, then we’re guaranteed to take similar communities in places like Stoke-on-Trent and Doncaster.” 

The website reported a similar sentiment in Blackburn and added that in one solidly working class polling district of Leigh, Greater Manchester, 56 per cent of voters had cast their ballot by 2pm.

Elsewhere journalists relayed reports of record turnouts in other key working class areas including Leicestershire, in the East Midlands, and Dorsey, both of which are seen as pro-Leave. 

The Globe and Mail correspondent Mark McKinnon tweeted: “Reports of very high turnout - on pace for near 80 per cent - in Dorset and Leicestershire, both seen as pro-Leave regions.” 

Another journalist, Paul Waugh, said he had heard of “record turnout” in Leicestershire. 

And Lib Dem activist Sam Webber wrote: “Experienced clerk in a Dorset polling station predicts turnout there by 10pm (incl postal votes already received) between 78% - 82%.” 

Former Tory MP and Brexit campaigner Louise Mensch, meanwhile, said she was “hearing terrific things about turnout in the northern towns”. 

And the Isle of Wight County Press relayed reports that turnout on the island - believed to be one of the most staunchly pro-Brexit areas on the country - is running at between 75 and 80 per cent. 

Sunderland is expected to be the first city to declare its result tonight, with the announcement expected at around 12.30am on Friday.

