'Disgusting': Fury as Labour MP says Leave poster 'inspires extremists' amid Jo Cox death

2016-06-17

GETTY

Neil Coyle told Newsnight that Brexit campaigners have been disseminating “very dangerous” material which “risks inspiring the hard-right”.

The Bermondsey and Southwark MP went on to suggest the man who gunned down Mrs Cox, 41, outside a library in her West Yorkshire constituency may have been politically motivated.

He also aimed a blow at a Ukip poster published yesterday morning which shows male migrants queuing up to enter Europe.

 Look at what they are putting out and I just think that they are a very dangerous, and they risk inspiring extremist elements on the hard right in this country

Neil Coyle

The same ad is running on Express.co.uk today.

Mrs Cox, MP for Batley and Spen and a staunch supporter of giving Syrian refugees haven in Britain, was shot three times, including once in the head, and then stabbed repeatedly by an attacker outside Birstall library early yesterday afternoon.

WHO WAS JO COX?

He allegedly shouted “Britain First” as he carried out the killing.

The mother of two young girls tragically died in hospital soon after from her horrendous injuries, sending Westminster into shock.

A 52-year-old man, believed to be recluse Tommy Mair, was arrested shortly after the horror attack and is in custody.

Detectives are now investigating whether the killing was motivated by his political beliefs.

Getty

Mr Coyle, a friend of Mrs Cox’s, said the Leave campaign needs to be “careful” about material it publishes ahead of Thursday’s EU Referendum.

The Labour MP started talking about the poster Ukip published yesterday, which has been called “fundamentally racist” by critics, despite both sides of the EU fight agreeing to stop campaigning for a day in honour of Mrs Cox, who believed it was better to stay in the EU.

He said: “I think that the kind of nonsense that they inspire online from anonymous accounts and actually the core content of the poster they launched today, look at what they are putting out and I just think that they are a very dangerous, and they risk inspiring extremist elements on the hard right in this country.”

Getty

PA

Disgusted viewers quickly took to social media to display their distaste at Mr Coyle’s comments, saying he was politicising Mrs Cox’s death.

User Daiitoku, said: “Neil Coyle needs to give his head a wobble. Making political capital out of this is disgusting.”

Paul Butler added: “As soon as I think MP's can't go any lower they surprise me again. Political gain on the back of a colleague's death.”

Others called for Mr Coyle to be fired, with Christopher Christie writing: “A tragic event that transcends politics. MPs shamelessly exploiting this outrage for political expediency should be deselected.”

And Phil Kitch said: “Shameful @coyleneil. Very inappropriate to exploit death of an MP to make political capital. Disgusting.”

Grieving friends and MPs attended a service at Mrs Cox’s local church last night, with about 500 people packing the venue out to pay tribute to the MP, who was only selected last May during the last general election.

An impromptu memorial was set up outside Parliament, with mourners, including Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, visibly devastated by her death.

Two hours after she died, her husband Brendan tweeted a photograph of Mrs Cox, urging people to “fight against the hatred that killed her”.

In a heartbreaking statement, he said: “Today is the beginning of a new chapter in our lives. More difficult, more painful, less joyful, less full of love. 

“I and Jo's friends and family are going to work every moment of our lives to love and nurture our kids and to fight against the hate that killed Jo.”

WHO ARE BRITAIN FIRST?

