WATCH: Terrifying moment British tourists were confronted by rioting Calais migrants

2016-06-22

The bone chilling footage shows their car driving through thick clouds of tear gas as French riot police battle in vain to restore control to the road leading up to the town's port. 

It further underlines the carnage that gripped the lawless port town yesterday as revealed by Express.co.uk, when a crowd of 300 migrants chanting "f*** the UK" hurled rocks at cars and tried to board lorries and ferries to Britain. 

In the video, uploaded to the driver's Instagram page, rioting migrants can be seen running wild on the road leading up to Calais port, which had to be closed for hours by the authorities sparking traffic misery for tourists. 

Families reported being stuck in the chaos all day as gangs of migrants attacked the causeway in waves, hurling rocks and other projectiles at cars and breaking into lorries. 

Instagram

Instagram

During the footage a small pop can be heard and the driver ducks out of view, worriedly saying: "Woah, what the f*** was that?"

His passenger replies "tear gas" as police fire canisters to repel the migrants and try to drive them off the road. 

The road ahead is barely visible as clouds of the tear gas surround the car, with the woman filming the chaos exclaiming: "Just crazy. I've never seen anything like this." 

The driver replies that his "heart is going a little bit", to which she replies: "Yeah, I'm a little bit scared." 

Yesterday afternoon French police battled around 300 migrants in the lawless port town after huge mobs targeted England and Wales fans returning across the Channel after cheering on their teams at Euro 2016 and motoring enthusiasts driving back from the Le Mans 24-hour race. 

Gangs of migrants ran out onto the motorway and brought traffic to a standstill outside the port, so that they could break into lorries and stow away in an attempt to sneak across the Channel.

Chaos erupted at around 3pm French time when the hundreds of migrants made an organised raid on the motorway linking the town to the port, which was closed by authorities for more than four hours, sparking traffic mayhem. It finally reopened at around 7pm after being left strewn with debris. 

Mirants clash with police in Calais

Calais has been plagued by migrant violence over the past few years, with tens of thousands of migrants arriving in the town hoping to sneak across the Channel and into Britain. 

The latest outburst of chaos comes just days before Britain decides on its future place on the EU, with immigration the key issue of the Brexit debate. 

Britons will vote on whether or not to leave the European Union in an historic referendum on Thursday.

