'Brexit sounds like a granola bar' John Oliver mercilessly mocks Britain over referendum

2016-06-20

Ahead of Thursday’s "once-in-a-generation" vote, John Oliver used his HBO show to discuss the nuances of the Brexit campaign – while referring to Boris Johnson as Bam-Bam from 'The Flintstones'.

At one point Oliver, 39, who is originally from Birmingham, described the UK as "the birthplace of the Beatles, but very much the world’s Ringo".

Oliver told his audience: "The EU is not perfect: it’s large, confounding, and relentlessly bureaucratic.

"Think of it like Gerard Depardieu: it’s an unwieldy European body that’s a source of great bewilderment.

WHAT IS BREXIT?

HBO

 There is an innate British desire to tell Europe to go f*** itself

John Oliver

"But Britain leaving it would be a huge destabilising decision, so we would expect the Brexit camp to have some pretty solid arguments.

"Unfortunately, many of them are bulls***."

Oliver also enlisted the help of a barbershop quartet to sign an expletive-filled version mocking the EU – set to Beethoven’s ‘Ode to Joy’ the EU’s official anthem.

At one point Oliver said: "To recap: immigration policy may not change, hysteria over regulation is a red herring, the costs of membership are reasonable, and the economic benefits of staying appear to outweigh the costs, and yet, polls suggest my homeland is on the edge of doing something absolutely insane.

"And on some level I actually kind of understand.

GETTY

"Because there is an innate British desire to tell Europe to go f*** itself."

Oliver then took part in a sketch as he mocked different European nations – describing Luxembourg as "what happens when you leave Lichtenstein out in the sun too long".

Oliver summed up his views of the EU by saying: "Here is how I feel about the EU: it’s a complicated, bureaucratic, ambitious, overbearing, inspirational and consistently irritating institution.

"And Britain would be absolutely crazy to leave it especially because, if it stays, it can reap all the benefits while still being a total d*** about everything.

"And that’s the British way."

Video of Oliver’s Brexit segment has been widely shared on social media, with his call to Remain angering some backing Leave.

One Facebook user wrote: "I can no longer respect your opinion if you cannot support sovereignty for your own country.

"Thanks for being just another mindless talking head."

Another said: "Britain by itself is still one of the top economies in the world.

"They will be fine in the long run."

Brit Nathan Adams posted: "Sorry John, maybe you have been away too long, but I’m voting leave for a better future, one that is flexible and able to negotiate a trade deal with Canada that doesn’t take 7yrs then fall apart."

