Brexit: Don't panic - HBO says Game of Thrones will NOT be affected by Referendum result

2016-06-24

HBO

In a flurry of panicked and presumptive reports in the run up to the EU Referendum, it was suggested by various media outlets that HBO's Game of Thrones would face difficulties if Britain voted to leave the European Union.

But HBO have quashed these reports.

In a statement released today, the broadcaster said: "We do not anticipate that the result of the EU Referendum will have any material effect on HBO producing Game of Thrones."

The panic came from the presumption that, because the series is shot in Northern Ireland, it is supported by the European Regional Development Fund.

Given that Northern Ireland is part of the UK, and the European Regional Development Fund is part of a European program to incentivize productions to film in Europe, it was thought that part of Game of Thrones' funding might get cut off.

HBO

 The show does get funding and tax incentives from other regional programs, but they’re not ones that are expected to be impacted by the vote

HBO

This, however, was a misconception; HBO has reportedly not taken money from the Fund for the last few seasons, presumably due to the massive and lucrative success of the franchise.

HBO have clarified today that "the show does get funding and tax incentives from other regional programs, but they’re not ones that are expected to be impacted by the vote".

This statement from HBO itself has calmed the frazzled nerves of many a Game of Thrones fan, who have cared more about this than any other aspect to Britian's exiting the EU.

GETTY

I don't care about Brexit unless it affects something that matters to me & most Americans..Game of Thrones!!! cc: @QueenzOfMedia

God help this Boris if Brexit messes with Game of Thrones filming.

HBO

Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), makes a statement after Britain voted to leave on the European Union

One Twitter user posted today: "The best scaremongering so far is that the Game of Thrones budget could be hit by Brexit".

Another, in the states, wrote: "Most Americans: Who cares about #Brexit? It doesn't affect me. . . wait, Game of Thrones may suffer now??"

Fans will no doubt watch this weekend's season six finale much more relaxed.

Game of Thrones season six ends on Monday at 9pm on Sky Atlantic and is a feature length finale.

