Brexit is a victory for democracy: Leave’s bravery will usher in a golden era for us all

2016-06-24

GETTY

When the history books are written, June 23, 2016 will be remembered as the day when Britain's bravery ushered in a golden age of global freedom. 

This is a great country, with a long and proud tradition of standing up for what is good and right. 

And today you, the great British public, have struck another historic blow for the fundamental rights of our fellow men and women not just in Europe, but across the globe. 

Once again it has come down to the United Kingdom to forge a path for freedom and democracy. 

Brussels tried to suppress you, to brow-beat and defeat you. But the bulldog British spirit is not so easily tamed. 

As David Cameron packs his bags and leaves Downing Street - his next door neighbour George Osborne surely following closely behind - he will pass below the Union Jack fluttering proudly in the breeze. 



REUTERS

 Free yourselves from the shackles of the dying European Union

We hope it reminds him that this is a courageous nation that will never, ever bow to the type of tyrannical bullying his Project Fear so mercilessly espoused. 

The Express was the newspaper that won a referendum, after officially launching our campaign to get Britain out of the European Union six years ago.

Since then we have been steadfast in our view that a world without the Brussels machine will be freer and more prosperous. 

We love Europe. Its people are our friends, neighbours and allies and they shall remain so. 

Indeed, today Britain has secured a victory for the suppressed people of the continent every bit as much as we have won our own hard-fought battle against autocracy. 



To the impoverished people of Greece, who are literally dying in the streets. To the young of Spain, Portugal and Italy who cannot get jobs because Brussels values its ideological drive for a United States of Europe above their livelihoods and futures. To the people of Germany, Holland and Scandinavia who have seen their communities change beyond recognition by mass migration they never asked for. 

We say this - join us. Free yourselves from the shackles of the dying European Union, which is becoming ever more nakedly transparent about its federalist ambitions. 

Open your arms to the world and together we can forge a golden age of cooperation, peace and prosperity based not on hated diktats and bullying, but instead on our common values. 



A future of friendship built on camaraderie and genuine public consent will surely last longer and be less poisonous than unwanted federalisation enforced by stealth on the command of unelected bureaucrats. 

Today is just another example of how Britain's history is one which is steeped in the fight to ensure that good defeats evil. 

Our heroic men and women have made countless sacrifices over the centuries to ensure that not just we, but our friends across the globe can enjoy the taste of freedom every day. 



AFP

We had almost forgotten how sweet liberty and democracy is.

But thanks entirely to the bravery you have shown, our children and grandchildren are assured the opportunity to forge their own futures. 

This may well be our finest hour yet.

