'It can be OUR Independence Day' Johnson's rousing speech ahead of historic referendum

2016-06-22

Speaking during the BBC's 'Great Debate', the outspoken Brexit activist slammed the 'Project Fear' campaign for "woefully underestimating" Britain.

Mr Johnson said: "We offer hope, we believe in Britain... If we vote Leave and take back control, this Thursday can be our country's Independence Day."

Audience members at Wembley Arena got on their feet and even chanted the former London mayor's name following his rousing speech.

Mr Johnson said: "There is a very clear choice between those on the Remain side who speak of nothing but fear – and those of us who offer hope.

"They say we can't do it, we say we can. They say we have no choice but to bow down to Brussels. We say they are woefully underestimating this country.

"If we vote Leave, we can take back control of our borders, of huge sums of money, of our trade policy and of our whole law-making system."

BBC

Mr Johnson was joined by Labour MP Gisela Stuart and Energy Minister Andrea Leadsom to put forward the case for Brexit during the debate.

The Remain camp was represented by TUC boss Frances O'Grady, Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson and Sadiq Khan, Mr Johnson's successor as London mayor. 

The event, which was the BBC's last live debate before the historic vote on Thursday, was hosted by Question Time presenter David Dimbleby.

BBC

Speaking after the debate, Justice Minister and Vote Leave supporter Dominic Raab hailed a "slam dunk victory for Brexit".

He told Express.co.uk: "Who's got the optimism on their side, who's got the ambition for this county and the confidence for the British people?

"It was a slam dunk victory for Brexit – they held their nerve, they got all the jibes, all the insults and all the negativity and actually articulated optimism."

BBC

Michael Gove, Justice Secretary and co-chair of the Vote Leave campaign, attacked the Remain side's arguments as "typical of the Europhile mentality".

He added: "Why is it the case that Britain cannot survive when Australia, Canada and New Zealand survive as independent, nation states?"

Asked what level of immigration Britain would have outside the EU, Mr Gove said: "It's for the British people to decide, that’s the great thing about democracy."

BBC

Vote Leave boss Matthew Elliott said the debate proved the Remain campaign cannot make a "positive" argument about Britain's EU membership.

He added: "They've lost the economic argument, they don't want to spend the £350million we send to Brussels every week on our priorities.

"The public can choose Project Fear, or they can chose Project Hope and take back control of their money and their borders. A vote to Leave is a vote for democracy."



Ukip MEP Diane James said: "Remain didn't have anything to put forward as to what would be the benefits of staying in. There was nothing positive."

Speaking about the ferocity of Tory attacks on each other during the debate, she added: "I've spoken now at so many events where I've heard the blue-on-blue type attack.

"And I've also heard a Cabinet minister say he believes David Cameron will continue as leader. My view is that Cameron's credibility has actually been shredded."

