Cross Bencher: Sir Bernard Ingham is backing Hillary Clinton in presidential election

2016-06-19

GETTY

“We rather admire bossy women who get things done,” he proclaims. 

“I cannot believe that Americans, however disaffected with their politicians, will choose to elect the unpredictably inflammatory Donald Trump.

"I expect them, if only by default, to acquire their first woman president.”

-------------------

THE EU referendum debates have given Brexiter James Gray, 61, Tory MP for North Wiltshire, a moment to reminisce about his early days trying to get elected.

“To a degree public meetings are a thing of the past. Most people will make up their minds through what they read in their newspapers, see on television,” he writes on his website. 

“But they have a very real role to play in an area like this and I have greatly enjoyed attending them. Rather 18th century in a sort of way, and thankfully more peaceful than those I used to attend in my first try at getting elected to Parliament – in Ross, Cromarty and Skye in 1992. 

"I used to take a friendly bagpiper with me in those days to drown out the hecklers.” 

-------------------

GETTY

ALTHOUGH he doesn’t totally rule himself out of a second run at the leadership, David Davis believes Boris Johnson is the most likely successor to David Cameron.

“They [MPs] all know Boris, they barely know anyone else,” he says. 

“He’s attractive, he’s charming, he’s funny, so they’re likely to vote for him. 

"Because they’re likely to vote for him he’s likely to be the winner if he gets to the last round, which means he’s more likely to get to the last round because a lot of people want to be on his coat tails.”

-------------------

GETTY

WC FIELDS said you should never work with animals or children... something Newsnight presenter Emily Maitlis seems to agree with.

“I’m rubbish with babies,” admits the mother-of-two, 45. 

“I need things that can speak. Except dogs, confusingly. I prefer ones that don’t bark. 

"My whippet and I have long chats where I explain the innermost workings of my mind and he stares soulfully at the fridge. Everyone’s happy.” 

She also reveals how she has had to learn how to take compliments, adding: “Now, I don’t dissect what they might mean or wonder whether someone’s mixed me up with Sophie Raworth.”

-------------------

GETTY

KEN LIVINGSTONE has claimed that he might have Jewish roots. 

The former mayor of London, 71, who has been suspended from the Labour Party for arguing that Hitler supported Zionism, tells the Jewish Chronicle he might have Jewish ancestry on his mother’s side. Asked to name a Jewish friend, he cited the late Lord Janner, a one-time fellow Labour MP. 

“Greville Janner used to drive me home from the House of Commons at night,” he said. 

“We would chat away about the Middle East. He would speculate about whether or not I was Jewish, because my grandmother’s name was Zona.” 

Mr Livingstone added: “I have lots of Jewish friends and I always have had. I’ve had members of the Board of Deputies round for parties... When I went to Israel and stopped by a kibbutz, I felt completely at home there. Everyone was a leftie like me!”

