Who are Britain First? ‘Jo Cox gunman shouted’ name of far-right group

2016-06-17

PA Twitter Britain First 

Britain First’s leader Paul Golding immediately distanced the nationalist group from the terrible killing and stressed that the witness accounts were “hearsay”. 

Mr Golding said: “It’s an attack on a mother, it’s an attack on our parliamentary system and just it’s a downright despicable act of criminality on the streets of Yorkshire. That’s what we believe, that’s what we think.” 

The far-right politician said there was no confirmation that “Britain first” was shouted at all, while the words have been used repeatedly by Brexit campaigners around the country as part of the referendum debate. 

He condemned the killing as a disgusting “outrage”, adding:  “We are nothing to do with it. We would not condone actions like that. We carry out protests and we stand in elections.” 

Mr Golding, who stood against Sadiq Khan in the London mayoral election in May, said that British First also carries out direct action such as invading halal slaughterhouses. 

The video address was filmed in front of Britain First’s political logo that shows the Union Jack with a lion, which is England’s national symbol.

The backdrop also included Britain First’s pro-Brexit slogan “Taking our country back” and the name of patriotic British song "Rule Britannia”. 

IG Britain First 

Former members of the British Nationalist Party (BNP) formed Britain First as a ultra-nationalist splinter group in 2011.  

The political party describes itself as a “loyalist movement” that opposes immigration and wants to defend British traditions, but rejects accusations of racism.



Its website says: “Britain First is opposed to all mass immigration, regardless of where it comes from – the colour of your skin doesn’t come into it – Britain is full up.”

Members of Britain First, dressed in military-style uniforms, took part in an activist training camp in Snowdonia earlier this month. 

Britain First, which has more than 1.4 million ‘likes’ on Facebook, has carried out mosque invasions and marches, dubbed Christian Patrols, through the streets.



Very proud of the people of Dewsbury and Batley today - who faced down the racism and fascism of the extreme right with calm unity

More than a hundred Britain First members, with crucifixes and Union Jacks, took part in a march near Mrs Cox’s Yorkshire constituency of Batley and Spen in January.

Mrs Cox, who was pro-EU and left-wing, tweeted: “Very proud of the people of Dewsbury and Batley today - who faced down the racism and fascism of the extreme right with calm unity.”

The Labour MP and aid worker had pushed for Britain to accept more child refugees from Syria and her family took part in a battle with Brexit boats on the River Thames this week.

WHO WAS JO COX? 

School children and teachers throw flowers on to the hearse carrying murdered Member of Parliament Jo Cox's as her funeral cortege will passes through Heckmondwike in northern Britain

Mr Golding is a former BNP councillor for Swanley in the Sevenoaks district of Kent. He stood as the BNP candidate for Kent in the 2010 general election. 

The far-right politician was a close ally of Nick Griffin before quitting the BNP and has been involved in loyalist flag protests in Northern Ireland.







Mr Golding described the group as a “perfectly legal political party” and said that he had been stuffing envelopes when the sad news about the attack broke yesterday. 

He added: “I hope this person that carried it out is strung up by the neck from the nearest lamppost. That’s the way we view justice."  

