British police pledge to keep working closely with Europe to tackle security

2016-06-24

GETTY

As the dust settles and Europe's security services face the daunting task of negotiating new intelligence-sharing deals, senior British officers have said they must continue to work closely with their European counterparts, despite severing ties with Brussels.

Assistant Commissioner Martin Hewitt, vice chairman at the National Police Chiefs' Council, said: "Ahead of the EU referendum, we stated our need to work closely and at speed with European countries to keep people in the UK safe from organised crime, cyberattack, terrorism or violent offenders.

"This operational requirement must be maintained as the UK leaves the European Union."

He added: "It is now for the Government to negotiate the terms of our relationship with Europe but we will work with them to ensure we retain our ability to share intelligence, biometrics and other data at speed and to work with foreign police forces on linked investigations, inquiries and arrests."

On Wednesday, Europol chief Rob Wainwright warned that a Brexit would harm the UK's ability to fight crime.

He said a vote to Leave "has the potential to harm the UK's ability to fight terrorism and crime, because of the extent to which police co-operation information systems and other capabilities in the EU have become embedded in the [British] police community and, to a lesser extent, the intelligence community".

The world reacts to Britain's EU Referendum result

But police chiefs have called for the continent's police forces to rally together in the face of unprecedented challenges at home and abroad.

In the wake of yesterday's vote, the body that represents rank-and-file officers said their rights must be protected.

GETTY

GETTY

Andy Fittes, general secretary of the Police Federation of England and Wales, said: "Now that the public has voted for the UK to exit the European Union it will be vitally important that we continue to work closely with the Government and key stakeholders to protect those rights our members receive that stem from European Union legislation.

"Many of these have been incorporated into police regulations including working time directives, various elements of equality legislation such as paid maternity leave and parts of health and safety legislation.

"It's important these are not affected and we, as will other large organisations, will seek reassurances that they remain unchanged.

"What other changes will take place and what these will mean for those we represent remains to be seen.

"What is important is that we are involved in those discussions and negotiations throughout."

