Let’s have a ‘vote of confidence’ in our fantastic country, says Gove

2016-06-19

GETTY

The Justice Secretary will be using the last days of the referendum campaign to make the positive case for Britain to leave the EU. 

Mr Gove, who is a prominent member of Vote Leave, said: “This is an opportunity for us to have a vote of confidence in Britain. I think we are fantastic country. 

“The fact is we are a successful multi-racial multi-ethnic society and at the same time a successful economy and at the same time a successful example to others in terms of culture, in terms of our health service, in terms of our sense of fair play. 

“It’s all things we should be confident about.” 

He added: “Voting to leave the EU would be a sign that we think the future of our country is positive. 

“We want to have control of the economic levers and of law once more that apply to this country or affect this country – so we can achieve a great future for the next generations and we can be a great example to the world. 

“In particular voting to leave is to say we are voting for everything we want, for democratic accountability and to be stronger than before.” 

With just four days to go until the country votes in the referendum, Mr Gove said he will be using every opportunity to make the optimistic argument for leaving. 

GETTY

He said: “One of the things about the remain campaign is that they have tended to be downbeat and pessimistic with their arguments. 

“And I think it is important that we make the optimistic arguments for leave in the last few days and to put an emphasis on optimism and hope and seizing on Britain’s potential.” 

He added: “I think the single strongest argument is democracy and control. 

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

“The money we send to the EU we could spend on the NHS, or on removing VAT on fuel which would greatly help the poorest. 

“We also can think of how we can strengthen science and education in this country in order to make a country where opportunities are wider. Ultimately for me the single strongest argument, whatever the future throws at us – and we know there are all sorts of challenges in the world – it is better if we are in control of our destiny and our future.” 

Mr Gove believes Britain can begin to become master of its own destiny within a year of voting to leave the EU. 

GETTY

He added: “Within the first year we should be able to bring forward legislation to curtail the powers of the European Court of Justice.” 

He claims this should make it easier to deport foreign offenders. The Justice Secretary also claimed that immigration should start to fall in the next Parliament. 

He said: “I think immigration is a good thing. But I also think that if we are going to continue to benefit from it then we need to have control. 

“I think we will have completed our negotiations to leave the EU by the time of the next election and then I think it will be in the Parliament after that the numbers will come down.”

