Jeremy Corbyn launches attack on 'bigoted' Ukip migration poster during EU debate

2016-06-20

The Labour leader attacked the poster, which claims open-door immigration is pushing Europe to "breaking point", during a Brexit debate tonight.

Speaking to an audience of young voters on Sky News, he said: "Syrian refugees are fleeing from a war, looking for somewhere safe to go to.

"There has to be a humanitarian response, not the bigoted response of putting up a poster saying a group of desperate people are a threat.

 I don't blame Greece for this, I blame European leaders

Jeremy Corbyn

"They're no threat at all. The threat is the hatred that is put towards those people by the people who put up that poster.

"I don't the co-ordinated response to the refugee crisis which has turned Greece into a transit camp for refugees.

"I don't blame the Greek government for this, I blame the European leaders who haven't done enough on this."

SKY•GETTY

The socialist, who is supporting the Remain campaign, fielded a range of questions on Brexit as Thursday's historic referendum edges closer.

His appearance followed similar debates on the BBC and Sky News featuring David Cameron and the Justice Secretary Michael Gove.

The Prime Minister branded a "21st century Neville Chamberlain" during a tense question and answer session on Question Time last night.

And Michael Gove last week delivered a plea to quit the EU by describing how Brussels fishing quotas "destroyed" his family business.

SKY NEWS

Labour is spearheading the final stretch of the Remain campaign after Cameron struggled to win over working-class voters in northern England.

On Thursday, the Britain Stronger in Europe group will operate from Labour's London HQ in a further signal that Mr Cameron has been sidelined.

A recent opinion poll suggests the change of strategy is working, with 70 per cent of Labour supporters set to vote in favour of Remain.



But yesterday Mr Corbyn was forced to admit Britain cannot put a ceiling on immigration if the country stays inside the 28-member bloc.

The Islington North MP, who was elected Labour leader last year, told the BBC: "I don't think you can have one while you have a free movement of labour.

"I think the free movement of labour means that you have to balance the economy so you have to improve living standards and conditions."

