Premier League boss hits out as Cameron claims all teams voting Remain - without asking

2016-06-21

GETTY

The Prime Minister proudly ordered all football fans to spread the news all 20 of football’s top flight want to stay in the EU.

But the bold claims were quickly exposed as more political spin from the Prime Minister.

He tweeted: “Football fans should know: all 20 Premier League clubs say we’re Stronger In Europe.” 

Just minutes later Crystal Palace’s chairman Steve Parish, replied: “This really needs to be deleted, the club doesn’t have a view nor have we been asked, it’s for the individual.” 

A second tweet posted by Mr Parish in reference to Mr Cameron’s statement said: “That’s certainly not my personal position and not one ever endorsed by this club.”

Many Twitter users have criticised Mr Cameron’s “desperate” attempt to rally support for the Remain campaign, with some referring to the Prime Minister’s mix up between Aston Villa and West Ham. 

This really needs to be deleted, the club doesn't have a view nor have we been asked, its for the individual @David_Cameron @premierleague

GETTY

 This really needs to be deleted, the club doesn’t have a view nor have we been asked

Steve Parish

Mr Cameron was mocked by politicians and football fans when he appeared to forget his long-running claim to be an Aston Villa fan when he postured as a West Ham United supporter. 

The statement from Mr Cameron comes after the Premier League’s executive chairman Richard Scudamore said the top flight supported the UK remaining in the EU. 

But Mr Scudamore was not speaking on behalf of all 20 clubs in the league. 

GETTY

The Premier League boss said a Brexit would be "incongruous" in the context of the league's commitment to "openness".

Footballing legend David Beckham has also backed the Remain campaign today.

That's certainly not my personal position and not one ever endorsed by this club . https://t.co/GPCGNpHDyh

A total of 332 European players currently playing in the Premier League, Championship and Scottish Premiership would fail to meet the non-EU criteria if there were a Brexit, according to a study by the BBC. 

Research from the English Football Association found 66.8 per cent of starting players in the Premiership were foreign. 

