Boris accuses government and 'Project Fear' of 'leaning' on business to support Remain

2016-06-21

The former mayor of London claims it is "well-known" there is an operation being run out of Downing Street to lean on prominent figures whose opinions are likely to sway undecided voters.

The Tory MP praised the "heroism" of figures like JCB chief Anthony Bamford and James Dyson for speaking out in favour of leaving the EU.

He told Nick Ferrari on LBC: "Everyone has an interest in keeping friendly with the government.

"I do not wish to be disparaging or critical of my friends in Government but it is well-known that there is an operation in Downing Street.

"And you will get a call from certain gentlemen… and they will say ‘look, you know, we want to continue to have contracts with you, it’s very important that we want to continue friendly relationships’. 

GETTY

"There is an honours system as you know, all of this kind of thing.

"And that is how it is. There is a bit of leaning on."

Mr Johnson, who will appear on Tuesday night during the final televised EU debate at Wembley Arena, professed his love for Europe "with a capital E" but said the EU had grown too big and was now out of control.

With less than 48 hours until Britain votes, polls remain neck-and-neck.

During the BBC broadcast from Wembley Arena in north London, Mr Johnson will be joined energy minister Andrea Leadsom and Labour MP Gisela Stuart.

On the Remain side, Scottish Conservative leader Ruth Davidson will team up with Sadiq Khan and TUC general secretary Frances O’Grady.

 I do not wish to be disparaging or critical of my friends in Government but it is well-known that there is an operation in Downing Street

Boris Johnson

Ahead of the much-publicised debate Remain was given a boost when a star name came out in support of staying in the EU.

Former England captain David Beckham has said he will be voting to remain part of the EU on Thursday.

He said: "I played my best years at my boyhood club, Manchester United. I grew up with a core group of young British players that included Ryan Giggs, Paul Scholes, Nicky Butt and the Neville Brothers. Added to that was an experienced group of older British players such as Gary Pallister, Steve Bruce and Paul Ince.

"Now, that team might have gone on to win trophies but we were a better and more successful team because of a Danish goalkeeper, Peter Schmeichel, the leadership of an Irishman Roy Keane and the skill of a Frenchman in Eric Cantona.

"I was also privileged to play and live in Madrid, Milan and Paris with teammates from all around Europe and the world.

"Those great European cities and their passionate fans welcomed me and my family and gave us the opportunity to enjoy their unique and inspiring cultures and people."

