EU referendum 2016: When will the RESULTS come in? What time will we find out the winner?

2016-06-23

Getty

Polling stations will close at 10pm this evening, but it will be long night before we find out who has won the historic referendum. 

The major broadcasters have not commissioned any exit polls to predict the result, unlike at general elections, so there will be no early prediction of the winner.  

There were also no exit polls for the Scottish referendum, which increased the suspense and uncertainty on the night of the vote count. 

EU REFERENDUM: HOW TO VOTE

After the polls close at 10pm, ballot boxes will be taken from polling stations to 382 local count venues across Britain. 

The ballot papers will be verified and counted there before the local counting officer makes the declaration for the local area. 

Next the regional counting officer will add together the local totals in order to come up with the regional total. 

The national referendum result will only be declared after 11 regional totals, plus the total for Northern Ireland, have come in. 

PA

12.30am: The first counts – in Sunderland, the relatively pro-EU London borough of Wandsworth and Foyle in Northern Ireland – are expected to finish now. 

Brexiteers expect to take Sunderland easily and a big margin there could indicate a very difficult night to come for the Remain camp. 

But Chris Hanretty, reader in politics at the East Anglia University, said: “If the result in Sunderland is very close, then Remain has probably won.

"We should expect Leave to be six percentage points ahead in Sunderland. That’s my best estimate of the gap in Sunderland, but it’s come with uncertainty. 

“If, god forbid, the referendum were to be repeated 100 times, then ninety times out of one hundred I’d expect the gap to be between Leave 14 percentage points ahead and Remain

one percentage point ahead. 

“That means it’s not impossible that Leave will win whilst losing in Sunderland. But it would be difficult.”

12.45am: Next up is the City of London. This symbolic location is home to Britain's financial centre, which could be badly hit by Brexit. 

1am: Look out for the results from Oldham and Swindon, which could swing towards Brexit. Four Belfast counts are due to finish at around 1.15pm.

1.30am: It will be interesting to see if the Leave side can ride to victory in the northern Labour town of Wigan and the Welsh town of Merthyr Tydfil. 

2am: Basildon in the Brexit stronghold of Essex will announce its result at the same time as South Norfolk, which could be a key victory for the Remainers. 

3am: A majority of the counts are expected to finish sometime between 3am and 4am and we will start to get an idea of the outcome.  

Mr Hanretty, from East Anglia University, said on his blog: "We will probably have a good idea of the result by the time Lancaster reports (estimated time 3.30am)."

4am: By this stage of the night, clear trends should have emerged. If Leave is not winning by now then Brexit is likely to be off the cards. 

4.30am: Many of the major cities, which are more likely to vote Remain, are due to announce their results at this time of the night. 

5am: It may be possible to call the result by now because a vast majority of the results will have come in. By 5.30am, there will only be 30 more areas to go. 

Mr Hanretty said the BBC is "chronically risk-averse" so will probably wait a bit longer before declaring the result because it likely to be so close. 

He said: "Given that there are awkward issues to do with turnout, and no exit poll on which to base inferences on, I doubt that the BBC will call the result before 5am, and probably not before 6am."

7am: The last results are due to come in from count venues in Cheshire East, Arun in West Sussex, Waveney in Suffolk and Harborough in the East Midlands.  

HOW TO WATCH RESULTS ON TV

Chief counting officer Jenny Watson, based at Manchester Town Hall, will announce the final result after all the regional totals have come in. 

The Electoral Commission estimates that the national declaration is due to happen at “around breakfast time” on Friday morning. 

But the Commission adds: “There is considerable uncertainty about when this will be given that it is dependent on all 382 local totals being declared.”

4am: Northern Ireland and Wales are expected to announce their results first after the final results come in at 4am. 

5am: The broadly pro-EU regions of London and Scotland are expected to make their declarations at around 5am. 

Yorkshire and Humber's final local result is also due to come in at 5am, shortly after the declaration by the North East.

6am: The West Midlands set to declare at around 6am, followed by the South West at 6.30am.

7am: Eastern, North West, East Midlands and South Eastern regions are scheduled to be the last to reveal their results at 7am.

Here is table of the estimated times for the count results across Britain put together by the Electoral Commission.   

