Brexit: What will happen to expats when Britain leaves the EU?

2016-06-24

Getty

Fears about a possible exodus from Europe have been heightened after pessimistic statements by officials such as former Attorney General Dominic Grieve. 

Mr Grieve has proclaimed: “Some two million UK citizens working in EU countries would find themselves becoming illegal immigrants overnight.”

More than 1.2million British expats live in the EU - mainly in countries such as Spain, Ireland and France -  according to the UN. 

Here is a look what Brexit would mean for them.

Roland Smith, a fellow at free market think tank the Adam Smith Institute, said that many British expats have concerns about whether they could stay in Europe in the event of Brexit. 

But Mr Smith said: “That one has been knocked on its head by all sides. No-one is suggesting that people will be repatriated from this country or repatriated from anywhere else.

“It would be impossible to implement but also incredibly damaging economically.” 

Getty

Mr Smith said: “There are rights issues to do with healthcare and access to the host country’s benefits system. 

"I think these are quite minor in the grand scheme of things. Some people would say healthcare is more of an issue.” 

Mr Smith said that he strongly believes Britain would become part of the European Economic Area (EEA) in a similar way to Norway and Switzerland. 

As a result, his opinion is that “not very much” would change for expats. He said: “They will carry on pretty much as before." 

He said expats have the same concerns as everyone else, adding: "It is about whether you are concerned about the state of our democracy - the EU is fundamentally undemocratic.” 

But a Government paper on Brexit has warned there is no guarantee that expats would keep the rights to work, reside, own property and use public services such as healthcare. 

It said: “UK citizens resident abroad, among them those who have retired to Spain, would not be able to assume that these rights will be guaranteed. 

“At the very least, any terms which the UK seeks for its own citizens would have to be offered to EU citizens wishing to come to or stay in this country.”

Asked what would happen to expats in the event of Brexit, a Leave.EU spokesman said: “Expats rights will be grandfathered due to the Vienna Convention.”

The Vienna Convention of 1969 states that people keep the rights that they once exercised under a treaty, even if that treaty is later terminated. 

Therefore expats in Europe would retain their “acquired right” to stay there, but it would not apply to people who move abroad in the future. 

Mr Smith said that these “acquired rights” include British expats’ rights to live in another country and own property there. 

But he said: “They are quite basic. The rights do not cover healthcare or benefits. That is the legal view of the legal profession.”

