Furious voter brands Remain 'arrogant' over its 'negative' EU campaign

2016-06-22

On Tuesday night leading figures from both the Remain and Leave camps took part in the BBC 'Great Debate' at Wembley arena.

London mayor Sadiq Khan, Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson and TUC Secretary General Frances O’Grady took on Brexiteers Boris Johnson, Andrea Leadsom and Gisela Stuart, all of them MPs.

Mr Johnson used the debate to accuse the Remain side of running Britain down while Ms Davidson said Leave had mislead the British public over Brussels’ influence over the UK.

Reacting to debate, which was attended by around 6,000 people, one LBC listener said the Remain side had offered no reassurance over the risks Britain faces if it stays in the EU.

"It was a disappointing debate in some ways," said Edward, from north London.

"I thought that the Remain campaign had the opportunity to put forward a positive vision."

He continued: "I don’t know if everything is going to be fine if we stay part of the eurozone.

"Which is a horrendous mess at the moment.

AFP

 It is not the fear which is scaring me it is the fact they cannot put forward a positive case

Edward from north London

"Why are they not putting forward a positive vision?

"They are putting forward just negative, negative fear.

"It is not the fear which is scaring me it is the fact they cannot put forward a positive case."

The eurozone is defined as the 19 of the 28 nations across Europe who have adopted the euro as their currency.

Britain is not a part of the eurozone and it is not government policy to seek to join the euro.

There are increasing concerns crisis-plagued Greece will require another EU-funded bailout this summer, sparking fears of more uncertainty over the future of the single currency.

Speaking to Ian Collins, Edward continued: "I think it is a very unclear path whichever way we go.

"It is very arrogant of the Remain campaign to sit there and say 'everything is going to be fine if we stay part of the EU'.

"The EU has been an absolute disaster for some countries.



"If you look at Greece, if you look at Spain, if you look at Italy and you look at the debt these countries are carrying."

"And look at the imbalance of the EU and how Germany has such a massive hand in what happens in the EU," he continued.

"It is not a democracy, it is not fair. It is a great single market to be a part of but at the end of the day if we are looking at the EU as a whole and seeing what we get out of it… are we ready to compromise on what we have in Britain?

"To be part of something which is not really succeeding."

The nation votes on Thursday, with politicians using the last day of campaigning to hammer home their messages.

Boris Johnson was set to embark on a helicopter tour of Britain while David Cameron made multiple media appearances.

Nigel Farage made his last major speech of the campaign, saying the result "may be tight, may be narrow" before adding: "I genuinely believe we are going to win this."

