New EU tax raid on Britain: Staying in could cost each household another £2,600

2016-06-20

GETTY

Brussels has shown no signs of relenting in its long opposition to the UK charging zero and cut-rate VAT, campaigners say. Food, children’s clothes, books, domestic fuel, newspapers and even funerals will all be targeted.

As David Cameron faced a mauling in a live TV debate last night, the issue emerged as just one of a damaging string of policies Brussels is plotting to clobber Britain with once Thursday’s referendum is over, if we vote to stay in.

According to HM Revenue and Customs, the Treasury would have received an extra £71.3billion in 2015-16 if rates were increased. That is the equivalent of an extra £2,649 per household.

 Tomorrow EU law might make us put up VAT on various necessities of life

Pro-Brexit Tory MP John Redwood

Pro-Brexit Tory MP John Redwood, a former Cabinet minister, said: “VAT is an EU tax, and the EU is always keen to control it more firmly. “Doubtless in the future they will want to tax us more, and will use VAT to do so.”

The latest discussion was on centralising the tax with no mention of the UK’s wish to abolish VAT on fuel, he said. “Tomorrow EU law might make us put up VAT on various necessities of life,” he added.

Vote Leave chief executive Matthew Elliott said: “We should have the power to set our own tax rates in this country rather than being told what to do by the EU.

“It is an affront to democracy and it directly impacts on British families, with their latest plans set to cost every household more than £2,500.

“That’s on top of the £350million we send to the EU every week. The only way to take back control is to vote Leave on Thursday.”

In March Mr Cameron and Chancellor George Osborne boasted at winning EU agreement that Britain could drop VAT on women’s sanitary products from five per cent to zero. But this has yet to happen and Brussels was recently forced to deny planning to shelve the reform.

Ex-London mayor and Leave campaigner Boris Johnson yesterday said Brexit would give back control over tax policy like cutting VAT on sanitary products.

He added: “It is absurd that our Chancellor has to go round begging other European finance ministers to do that.”

GETTY

Vote Leave said scrapping Britain’s current low and zero VAT items would add more than 10 per cent to the total tax burden. The campaign pointed to a series of statements by the EU over recent years in which Brussels has argued that reduced VAT rates are inconsistent with the single market.

As recently as January, Economic Affairs Commissioner Pierre Moscovici called for more harmonisation of tax, including scrapping the UK’s zero rates. Member states are free to set VAT on non-exempt goods and services at anywhere from Europe’s minimum standard of 15 per cent upwards.

They can set rates of below 15 per cent on certain goods, but need all 28 states to agree if they want to cut the rate to below 15 per cent on non-listed goods or cut a rate on anything to below five per cent.

GETTY



Meanwhile, the Daily Express can also highlight how Brussels is deliberately holding back unpopular policies until after Thursday. They include outlawing highenergy household appliances like kettles, toasters and hair dryers. A decision has been postponed until the autumn.

A mid-term review of the EU’s seven-year 2014-20 budget, expected to see calls for higher spending, was due at the start of the year but has also been postponed. If new countries like Albania, Serbia, Macedonia, Montenegro and Turkey join the EU, Mr Cameron has failed to get agreement that EU free movement rules would not apply to their citizens.

GETTY

And Leave campaigners claim the eurozone is heading for such a massive crisis Britain will be unable to keep Mr Cameron’s promise not to pay into bailouts. They also claim the EU is intent on creating its own defence force and new tax rules on fine art which could destroy London’s worldleading market.

Ukip MEP Steven Woolfe said: “The Eurocrat answer to every problem is always more Europe. With just days to go until the referendum, the Brussels mask is slipping. We know they have grand plans for a European army and a single European country containing Turkey and other states. But there will also be plenty more mad initiatives coming down the track if we vote to remain.

“Their proposed single European tax code is just the next step on the road to introducing a single tax system."

