Boris Johnson urges Brits to vote Brexit to "take back control"

2016-06-20

GETTY 

In a rallying cry ahead of Thursday’s referendum, the top Tory said the electorate had a once-in-lifetime opportunity to “take back control of this great country’s destiny”.

He called on voters to “believe in ourselves and what Britain can do. You have it in your hands to transform Britain’s current democratic arrangements for the better”.

He said: “You can change the whole course of European history, and if you vote Leave, I believe that change will be overwhelmingly positive.”

The former London mayor said the poll will be “a moment of fundamental decision”.

And he accused the Remain camp of offering “no change, no improvement, no reform”.

Voting to stay in the EU would mean “the steady and miserable erosion of parliamentary democracy in this country,” he added on the campaign trail at a truck dealer in Ipswich, Suffolk.

GETTY 

GETTY 

“If Britain votes to remain, then we continue to be subject to an increasingly anti-democratic system that is now responsible for 60 per cent of the law that goes through Westminster.”

This was “a phenomenon that contributes so powerfully to the modern voter’s apathy, the sensation that we are no longer in control of our destiny, and that voting changes nothing”.

The MP predicted “champagneguzzling backslapping” among Brussels bureaucrats if the UK votes to stay in the EU.

GETTY 

He added: “Now is the time to believe in ourselves and in what Britain can do. Of course we can continue to provide leadership and support for Europe – but inter-governmentally, outside the supranational EU system.

 I hope you will vote Leave and take back control of this great country’s destiny

Boris Johnson

“I hope you will vote Leave and take back control of this great country’s destiny. This chance will not come again in our lifetimes and I pray we do not miss it.”

As Mr Johnson made his call to arms, other Leave campaigners yesterday dismissed a Tory peer’s much-hyped “defection” to Remain.

Baroness Warsi’s announcement left them bemused as some senior Leave figures said they were not aware she had been a backer or had ever campaigned for Brexit.

GETTY 

The former Tory Party chairman, who quit government in 2014 over the Gaza conflict, said she was switching because moderate Leave voices had been drowned out by “lies and xenophobic campaigning”.

She singled out last week’s “indefensible” Ukip poster picturing a queue of refugees in Slovenia to drive home its “breaking point” immigration control message.

Lady Warsi said that kind of “nudge-nudge, wink-wink xenophobic racist campaign” caused long-term harm to communities.

And she accused former Cabinet colleague Michael Gove of repeating “lies” about Turkey joining the EU.

The peer said people like her, who had been “involved from the outset” in the campaign had espoused a “positive outward-looking vision” of Britain outside the bloc.

But those voices had been “stifled and what we see is the divisive campaign which has resulted in people like me and others who are deeply Eurosceptic and want to see a reformed relationship feel that they now have to leave Leave”.

Pro-Brexit Employment Minister Priti Patel played down the event.

Citing the weekend’s switch from Remain to Leave by former Army chief Lord Guthrie.

Ms Patel said: “She is one voice in this campaign. I think the voices that we need to listen to are the voices of the public.”



Asked about a tweet by Lady Warsi naming Leave campaigners, including Mr Gove along with the British National Party, as people she “wouldn’t get on a night bus with”, Ms Patel said: “There’s no need for personal comments. How does that help to inform the debate?”

Ukip leader Nigel Farage said Lady Warsi’s “defection” was “a typical No 10 put-up job. She never wanted to leave the EU”.

Pros and cons of Brexit

He added: “She has been consistently abusive about everything I and Ukip have said and done for the last few years. She never supported Britain leaving in the first place.”

Leave supporter and Tory MEP Daniel Hannan also questioned the peer’s credentials, saying: “When I invited Sayeeda Warsi to join the Leave campaign, she declined.

“Fair enough, obviously. But how is this a defection?”

