Dozens TURNED AWAY from voting in EU referendum because of registration ERROR

2016-06-23

GETTY 

Residents in Leighton Buzzard were unable to have their say after they were told they were not included on the registration list. 

Angry residents hit out, describing the situation as a “total shambles” and Central Beds Council eventually made arrangements for voters who had missed out.

Meanwhile, in London voters have been forced to wade through torrential flooding and downpours to arrive at their local polling stations to have their say in the once in a generation referendum. 

Out of 3,754 polling stations in the capital, three have been forced to close and five opened late due to flooding. 

Cars have been left submerged and referendum voters are struggling to reach polling stations. 

READ LIVE COVERAGE OF THE EU REFERENDUM HERE

PA 

PA 

 Residents described it as a 'total shambles'

London Fire Brigade confirmed it had received 550 emergency calls and attended more than 400 incidents. 

It urged people to only dial 999 "where there is a risk to life or property" after receiving twice as many weather-related emergency calls between 1.30am and 6.30am as the brigade usually handles in 24 hours.

The first voters to turn up to their local polling booth in Devon Way, Chessington were able to get inside to put a cross in their in/out box - but only after wading through huge puddles first.

A polling station in Surrey was hit by flooding as 40mm (1.5inches) of rain battered the country, however it remained open. 

Resident John Tindall said 15cm of of fast flowing water had struck the polling station and one man was lending wellington boots to voters trying to reach the polling station to cast their ballot. 

Kingston Council was also forced to shut two polling stations, including the Shiraz Mirza community hall in Malden Manor, telling voters to instead head to the Lawrence Avenue Children's Centre.

Flooding also affected the A3 - one of the major roads through Surrey - as the county was hit with no fewer than 32 yellow weather warnings for heavy rain, with the possibility of flash flooding.

Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), makes a statement after Britain voted to leave on the European Union

Surrey took the brunt of torrential downpours during the night, with the dark skies being lit up by prolonged lightning storms.

Elsewhere, residents in Barking had to be rescued from their homes by fire crew using boats. 

A polling station based in St Thomas Moore Church, Barking, was also forced to shut. 

Resident Jodie Rose said: “My Nan is 89 years go age and she’s already said that she won’t be going out to vote.”

Havering Council also urged voters in east London to make their way to polling stations on foot instead of driving. 

Roads in the area including Abbots Close, Romford; Cross Road and Collier Row were closed due to flooding. 

It tweeted: "Severe flooding on Lodge Lane in Collier Row. Access to Forest Row Centre polling station by foot only, no cars. Will keep you posted. 

"All polling stations are open, make sure you wear your wellies!!"

My Polling Station.. and its open..!!!! walking on water! pic.twitter.com/haUZoHL5Qa

GETTY 

In Newham, east London, two stations opened slightly later due to issues with staff travel and flooding, and one station in Tower Hamlets, east London, and one in Redbridge, north-east London, were also affected.

Barking and Dagenham Council in east London apologised when a polling station had to be closed after a water main burst.

A council spokesman said: "Due to flooding caused as a result of a burst water main, the polling station at St Thomas More Church, Longbridge Road, has had to be relocated.

"We are glad to say that we were able to notify and signpost affected residents first thing this morning."

The polling station has been relocated to two sites within walking distance.

