14p a pint and Are You Being Served? on the telly ­– welcome to life in 1973

2016-06-21

StudioCanal/REX/Shutterstock

Prime Minister Edward Heath took us into the EEC promising in a television broadcast: “There are some in this country who fear that in going into Europe we shall in some way sacrifice independence and sovereignty. These fears, I need hardly say, are completely unjustified.”

Evening News/REX/Shutterstock

 There are some who fear that in going into Europe we shall in some way sacrifice independence and sovereignty

Prime Minister Edward Heath

Mr Heath was hopeful that membership would bring prosperity to Britain.

He said: “From the point of view of our everyday lives we will find there is a great cross-fertilisation of knowledge and information, not only in business but in every other sphere.

"And this will enable us to be more efficient and more competitive in gaining more markets not only in Europe but in the rest of the world."

Leaving Mr Heath to one side, what was Britain like in 1973?

Daily Mail/REX/Shutterstock

The average weekly wage was between £32 and £40. If you couldn’t find a job then the dole would pay you £7.35 a week.

In those days when women did the shopping (has it changed?), a trip to the local supermarket would have seen her pay 11p for a sliced white loaf, 6p for a pint of milk, 29p for a pound of pork sausages, a frozen chicken would retail for 74p, 33p would buy you a dozen eggs, 13p for butter, 5 and half a pence for a pound of carrots and 15p for a bag of self-raising flour.

While she prepared the dinner, her husband might pop down the pub where a pint of beer would have set him back 14p. Just the one or two and then back in the car which would have cost around £1,000 and to fill it would cost 36p per gallon of petrol.

From April Fool’s Day, families would have found a new tax had been introduced abolishing Purchase Tax. Remarkably, the cost of buying everyday items was reduced. Purchase Tax added 25 per cent to the cost whereas VAT was originally 10 per cent. VAT is the third largest source of government revenue after income tax and National Insurance and it is illegal in the EU for VAT on most goods to be less than 15 per cent.

The biggest outlay for most people then and now is buying a house and a detached one would cost £16,980.

Remember letters? There was no email and no text messages so to contact that relative who lived far away you had to write a letter and the cost of a first-class stamp was 3p. Before the Post Office was privatised, it could take an age to get a phone installed; line rental was £5 a quarter.  Then as now you needed to buy a television licence and they cost £12.



Moviestore/REX/Shutterstock

But what could you watch? There were only three channels – BBC1, BBC2 and ITV.

The most popular soap was Coronation Street and in October fans were upset when Pat Phoenix announced that she was giving up the role of Elsie Tanner after 13 years. James Beck who had played the spiv Joe Walker in Dad’s Army died suddenly of a burst pancreas at the age of 44.

While viewers said goodbye to two popular figures more were introduced including Frank Spencer in Some Mothers Do ‘Ave ‘Em and  Grace Brothers opened for business in Are You Being Served? while Compo, Cleggy and Blamire made their first appearance in Last Of The Summer Wine (and ran until 2010).

The Wombles began tidying up Wimbledon Common and hitting the pop charts while Esther Rantzen and her boys began their 21-year run as consumer champions on That's Life.

A Royal Wedding, The Wombles and a new James Bond

On the big screen Roger Moore played James Bond for the first time in Live And Let Die, the eighth film in the franchise.

It was the third of four Bond films to be directed by Guy Hamilton, who died earlier this year. Paul McCartney’s theme tune was nominated for an Oscar.

Musically, Pink Floyd released Dark Side of the Moon and chart-toppers that year included Sweet, Slade (three times including ending the year with the perennial festive favourite Merry Xmas Everybody), Donny Osmond and his brother Little Jimmy, Gary Glitter (twice), David Cassidy, 10CC, Peters and Lee, Wizzard and the Simon Park Orchestra with Eye Level (the theme from Van der Valk).

REX/Shutterstock

Ian Dickson/REX/Shutterstock

On the sporting front this year the minnows of Leicester City beat the odds (5,000-1 at one stage) to win the Premier League but 1973 was also a year of footballing upsets when Sunderland beat the mighty Leeds United in the FA Cup Final thanks to an Ian Porterfield header.

It was the first time that an FA Cup-winning team had not contained a single full international, and the first postwar FA Cup won by a side outside the First Division.

1973 was the year of a Royal wedding when Princess Anne married Captain Mark Phillips.

Clement Freud was elected Liberal MP for the Isle of Ely, a seat he held until 1987.

And Noel Coward died as did comedian the Clitheroe Kid, and Roger Delgado, the first Master in Doctor Who, died in a car crash in Turkey, the year that Doctor Who celebrated its tenth anniversary.

We joined the Common Market. Two years later, we had a referendum on whether Britain should stay in the then nine-member bloc. On Thursday, we have a say on whether we remain in the now 28-country organisation.

PA

