Migrants will try to SWIM to Britain from Calais

2016-06-20

GETTY

Lieutenant Pierre-Joachim Antona, spokesman for the maritime prefecture that covers Calais, was speaking after the port was shut down on Saturday after migrants jumped into the sea as they tried to board ferries heading for Britain. 

Lt Antona said the migrants tried to get onboard car ferries bound for Dover, by bypassing security checks on the quayside. 

All had to be plucked out of the sea by a rescue helicopter, supported by craft including customs and fishing boats.

 In a naive way you can be led to believe that the journey will be quick and easy but it's an absolute deception - it's one of the most dangerous seas in the world

Lieutenant Pierre-Joachim Antona

He said: “This type of thing isn't exceptional or isolated.

“It's a real and lasting trend.

“In good weather, from the French coast, you can see England, and in a naive way you can be led to believe that the journey will be quick and easy.

“But it's an absolute deception - it's one of the most dangerous seas in the world.” 

Millions has been spent on tightening up security around the port and in the Channel Tunnel itself, an investment which is causing more migrants to attempt the dangerous sea crossing.

In a stark warning, Lt Antona said the strong currents and the number of ships in the Channel make the chances of survival very slim. 

Unlit boats used by people smugglers are particularly vulnerable as there is a “considerable risk” of them crashing into larger boats and capsizing. 

GETTY

A major search and rescue mission was launched don Saturday after migrants were spotted swimming in the Channel. 

A dockworker said: “Those plucked out of the water were rushed to hospital, and traffic was not allowed to move again until past 4am.”

Up to 5,000 migrants are currently living rough in Calais as they try and get to Britain, where they hope to claim asylum.

Figures released last month show the number of migrants who successfully smuggled themselves across to England on ferries has more than doubled in the past three years.

GETTY

Ministers disclosed that the number of 'clandestine entrants' who made their way into Britain through Dover and other ports has risen from 1,432 in 2013 to 2,935 in 2015.

Experts said that the true figures are likely to be significantly higher as many illegal immigrants disappear after entering the UK.

British territorial waters extend eight miles out into the Channel and it is the responsibility of the UK Border Force, part of the Home Office, to intercept the migrants.

AFP

But it has just five unarmed patrol ships for the UK's 11,000 miles of coastline.

A French legal professional based in Northern France said Albanian people smuggling gangs were now “running the boat trade against the Channel”, and that “it's the moneyed illegal immigrants who are getting across this way.” 



She said: “It's a hugely lucrative criminal operation, and the authorities are having to respond in kind. Police, coastguard and the navy are all involved in combatting it.”

It’s believed migrants pay anything from a few hundred pounds to £10,000 to get across the Channel. 

There are also occasional improvised attempts to get across the sea, ranging from migrants using beach dinghies bought in Calais, to constructing their own vessels out of debris.

