Stunned IMF urges for a ‘smooth transition’ for post-EU Britain after Brexit result

2016-06-24

REUTERS / GETTY

The IMF consistently warned of economic chaos in the event of a Leave victory.

But its managing director Christine Lagarde, who previously warned the economic impact of Brexit would range from "pretty bad" to "very, very bad”, has issued a statement promising full support for the newly independent country's finances. 

This comes as the FTSE 100 rebounded after a worrying morning, recovering to a loss of just 1.9 per cent. 



 We urge the authorities in the UK and Europe to work collaboratively to ensure a smooth transition to a new economic relationship between the UK and the EU

Christine Lagarde

This actually means the index will finish the week higher than it began it. 

Lagarde said in a statement released this afternoon: “We take note of the decision by the people of the United Kingdom. 

"We urge the authorities in the UK and Europe to work collaboratively to ensure a smooth transition to a new economic relationship between the UK and the EU, including by clarifying the procedures and broad objectives that will guide the process.



GETTY

“We strongly support commitments of the Bank of England and the ECB to supply liquidity to the banking system and curtail excess financial volatility. 

"We will continue to monitor developments closely and stand ready to support our members as needed.”

Roberto Azevedo, director-general of the World Trade Organisation, echoed Lagarde's comments.

On Twitter he wrote: "The British people have spoken. The WTO stands ready to work with the UK and the EU to assist them in any way we can."



GETTY

Lagarde had previously condemned the Leave campaign, warning that leaving the EU would result in economic catastrophe. 

The Washington-based financial advisory organisation were strongly pro-Remain - but said its decision was purely economic and not political. 

She said last week: “I certainly hope that from our neutral position we can at least shed some light on the economic value of one choice or the other. 

"We have reached our determination and certainly concluded that the economic risks of leaving are firmly to the downside."

GOOGLE

She had urged voters to show courage and vote Remain, warning the British economy could be reduced by as much as 9.5 per cent. 

Ms Lagarde: “It has been said that 'it takes great courage to see the world in all its tainted glory, and still to love it'. So I wish bon courage to our fellow Europeans from the United Kingdom!" 



Her concerns were mocked by the JD Wetherspoon pub chain, which is run by Eurosceptic and Leave campaigner Tim Martin.

He printed thousands of beer mats with the message: “Dear Madame Lagarde, at Wetherspoon we sincerely respect and admire the French people and your country, but note that you are due to stand trial in France for your part in authorising a €400m payment by the French state to Bernard Tapie - a supporter of your political party."

It also asked: “Why is Greece in such trouble after six years of IMF advice?”

