UK migrant numbers rocket because of foreign students who qualify and NEVER leave

2016-06-21

GETTY 

As the migrant crisis continues to grip Europe, shocking figures have revealed the UK’s population is swelling after welcoming 271,000 non-EU residents in the last year, while those leaving averaged just 99,000. 

And foreign students are said to be responsible for the bloat - in 2015 they accounted for 100,000 of the total net flow of 150,000, according to the Migration Watch report.

And the announcement of the latest figures has been postponed until after the EU referendum.

Lord Green of Deddington, chairman of Migration Watch UK, called on the Tory Government to take action.

GETTY 

 In all the talk about the government failing to reduce non-EU migration, the question of the vanishing students has been overlooked

Lord Green of Deddington, chairman of Migration Watch UK

He said: “In all the talk about the government failing to reduce non-EU migration, the question of the vanishing students has been overlooked. 

“The government have postponed, until after the referendum, the publication of the first information about the exit checks which came into effect in April 2015. They must be used to identify the culprit colleges and achieve the enforcement that is long overdue.

“This could bring net migration down below 100,000 a year if British emigration of some 50,000 a year is subtracted.

“That would leave EU migration which is currently running at 180,000 a year of which about two thirds are in low paid employment.



137 migrants of African origins were rescued by coast guard boats off the coast of Libya

GETTY 

It comes after the EU referendum campaign laid bare the apparent failure of the Government to reduce record levels of net migration, about half of which comes from the EU and half from outside Europe. 

There is no limit to the number of genuine international students who are allowed to come to the UK to study.

An unlimited number can also stay on and work so long as they can find graduate level work paying £20,000 a year.



GETTY 

Those who find an employer and stay on legally currently stands at around 6,000 a year while another 3,000 stay after marrying a British citizen.

However those who stay after extending their visa for further studies top the tables, amounting to an approximate 100,000 a year, and never subsequently depart.

It comes after Migration Watch previously released a report which highlighted a possible Brexit after this Thursday’s historic referendum could see the nation’s EU migration slashed by 100,000 a year through the introduction of work permits. 



