The EU has become bureaucratic and bloated... but it just needs reform, writes TIM FARRON

2016-06-18

GETTY

I know there will be some who may feel eurosceptic but are still making up their minds - unsure whether such a leap into the unknown really is one worth taking.

We could once separate our politics between domestic and international. But not anymore. The question is not whether Britain can survive alone, it is whether Britain can better thrive with others.  

When we face the world together, there is no doubt in my mind that for our future prosperity and safety, we should vote to remain.

There is no doubt in my mind that to work alongside those countries who share our interests and share our values, we need to remain. 

And there is no doubt in my mind that to be the beacon of hope and freedom, in a turbulent and dangerous world, we must vote to remain. 

We are a proud nation that stands tall in the world. We are home to freedom, ingenuity, creativity.



GETTY

For many people the top issue is jobs and the economy, but today I want to talk a little about sovereignty. 

 But let's reform the things the EU does so well, to create opportunity and drive prosperity

Tim Farron

One of the most principled arguments on the Brexit side is that if we leave Europe, we take back control of lots of areas of public policy. 

For many people, me included, the EU needs reform, there are sensible things we could do, some very quickly. Where it has become too burdensome, bureaucratic and bloated. 

But let's reform the things it does so well, to create opportunity, drive prosperity and open our eyes to the world.

GETTY

Let's complete the single market, and drive forward the digital economy. Let’s give small business much greater representation in Brussels.

But those who want to leave then say let’s ‘wrest back control’, helpfully forgetting that we pool sovereignty in all manner of other areas from the World Trade Organisation to NATO. This won’t change no matter the result of the upcoming referendum. 

Even the Commonwealth, many of whose leaders think we should remain within Europe.  

We pool sovereignty – we do that because it is in Britain’s best interest. Both in terms of security, support for key allies and friends and economically.





Even if we leave the EU, we will remain part of many organisations that work at a regional and multi-national level and that is a good thing. 

Cooperation breaks down barriers and I believe that we bolster our national interests by doing this, we gain from it and it makes us safer. 

There are millions of people in Britain, many Express readers included, who know that this is the biggest choice for our country in their lifetimes, and that just as Britain is stronger together with others, so are we as individuals stronger when we join those of like mind to achieve what is right.

 I am urging patriotic Express readers do the patriotic thing and vote to remain, to vote #INtogether.

