Hedge fund billionaire makes £200 MILLION by betting on Brexit - as pound plummets

2016-06-25

Getty

Leave supporter Crispin Odey is one of several hedge fund bosses who cashed in after taking large “short” positions on company stock and the pound by betting on their value falling following a vote to leave the European Union (EU).

The 57 year old, who has an estimated $4billion in personal assets, said he invested heavily in gold and bet on the pound falling against the dollar in the aftermath.

Yesterday investors rushed to buy gold which pushed its price to a two year high because both the pound and the FTSE 100 fell sharply in the hours following the result.

 We must remember how close it was but also how brave a decision it was!

Crispin Odey

If Britain had voted to remain in the EU he could have been hit by massive losses if financial markets had soared.

One of his bets was against homebuilders, Berkeley Group, whose value fell by more than a fifth yesterday.

Getty

Stocks included Lloyds, which dropped 21 per cent and ITV, which were down by more than 20 per cent.

Funds valued at about £1.5bn are expected to have gained 15 per cent in value - with a windfall of more than £220m.

Shortly after the result came out, he said “ordinary people have spoken”.

He added: “We must remember how close it was but also how brave a decision it was!”

Getty

Getty

Mr Odey, who was briefly married to news baron Mr Murdoch’s daughter Prudence, was thrust into the limelight in 2008 when he paid himself £28m after successfully anticipating the credit crunch.

It is thought George Soros, known for breaking the Bank of England, was also investing heavily in gold and gambling on the face stocks would fall if Britain voted for Brexit.

Brexit: What to expect next

Hedge funds betting on or against European stocks were hit hard on Friday, with most losing between two and four percent, investors said.

But most managers had prepared and reduced the amount of exposed capital, a report from Credit Suisse’s prime brokerage division.

Eric Siegel, head of hedge fund investments at Citi Private Bank, said: “I don't want to say it's a non-event, but we're not seeing panic.

“It's just a bad day in the market.”

However, some had major losses, including London-based Adelphi Capital’s $1.9 billion European fund which was down eight per cent on Friday, after already being down 0.5 per cent for the year last last week.

