'There is NO uncontrolled immigration' Corbyn defends EU on Andrew Marr

2016-06-19

The Labour leader slammed Mr Farage for raising fears over immigration during the EU referendum campaign and said Britain "must not turn our backs" on the humanitarian crisis caused by conflict in the Middle East.

Mr Corbyn dismissed claims there is "no uncontrolled immigration" and championed the need for workers' rights in Britain as the referendum campaign enters its final days. 

Last week, Mr Farage unveiled a Ukip poster calling for Brexit with the words "Breaking Point. The EU has failed us all," showing an image of migrants entering Europe last year.

Speaking on Sunday on the Andrew Marr Show, Mr Corbyn was asked whether politicians had been "too feeble" in making the case for immigration.

BBC•GETTY

 There is no uncontrolled immigration. There is free movement of people across the EU, which goes both ways

Jeremy Corbyn

He told Andrew Marr: "The far-right have been allowed to grasp the agenda.

"Farage for example puts up that appalling poster, which has a picture of a lot of desperate people fleeing from war saying 'they are coming to threaten us'.

"I think Rowan Williams [the former Archbishop of Canterbury] called it right… we have to play our part in dealing with the refugee crisis. All of us. It is a humanitarian crisis."

Mr Corbyn told Marr he did not believe you could have an upper limit on immigration because of freedom of movement.

He said: "I don’t think you can have one while you have a free movement of labour – and I think the free movement of labour means that you have to balance the economy so you have to improve living standards and conditions.

"And so that means the EU’s appalling treatment of Greece... that is a problem. If you deliberately lower living standards and increase poverty in certain countries in south-east or eastern Europe then you’re bound to have a flow of people looking for somewhere else to go."

He also refused to directly answer a question of whether he agreed with his deputy Tom Watson – who has said there needs to be a reform of freedom of movement.

GETTY

The Islington North MP said: "There is no uncontrolled immigration. There is free movement of people across the EU, which goes both ways.

"There is controlled immigration from outside Europe."

Mr Corbyn added that you cannot have the free movement of capital without the free movement of people.

He repeatedly criticised the austerity regimes applied across Europe, citing Greece as one example.

Defending the controversial campaign poster last week, Mr Farage said: "This is a photograph, an accurate undoctored photograph taken on October 15 last year following German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s call in the summer.

"If you believe, as I’ve always believed, that we should open our hearts to genuine refugees that’s one thing.

"But frankly, as you can see from this picture, most of the people coming are young males.

"They may be coming from countries that are not in a very happy state, they may be coming from places that are poorer than us but the EU has made a fundamental error that risks the security of everybody."

