SHOCK EU CLAIM: David Cameron made Euro boss promise to keep schtum over Brexit debate

2016-06-16

GETTY•SHUTTERSTOCK

Usually outspoken, Jean-Claude Juncker is having to go along with an order made by the UK Prime Minister which means the EU executive branch has to stay out of the Referendum debate, respected German magazine Der Spiegel said.

If there is a clear lead by the Brexit campaign in polls by the end of today - a week before the vote - then, and only then, can Juncker speak out.

It is thought by then it will be too late for him to influence the final outcome, but then nobody could accuse him of doing nothing to prevent Britain leaving the bloc under his watch.

If Brexit does happen, Mr Juncker would be the first Commission president in history to allow a member state to quit the EU.

Most major announcements and events have been put on hold until June 23, with the Commission's politicians and 30,000 civil servants treading on eggshells to ensure nothing they do provides material for the Brexit campaign.

Getty

Mr Juncker has asked each and every one of his 27 commissioners to use "common sense" while visiting Britain before next Thursday, it is claimed.

Even important papers which have been scheduled for release for months have been put on hold.

WHO'S WHO: TOP BRUSSELS BUREAUCRATS 

Chief EU diplomat Federic Mogherini was meant to be presenting the EU Global Strategy - the first detailed foreign policy guideline for 13 years - this week, but has been informed it will be delayed.

Many of her suggestions will focus on further integration of European defence forces, something which would anger Brexiteers concerned about an EU army being formed.

Getty

Getty

Responding to a parliamentary question this week from Ukip defence spokesman Mike Hookem MEP, Ms Mogherini said "forms of cooperation in defence are welcomed and encouraged by the EU".

She also said combining forces would "increase the capacity to develop capabilities" which the EU could then exploit.

An EU summit originally planned for June 23 and 24 has also been pushed back a week.

Number 10 has been contacted for comment.

WHAT IS THE EU?

