Brussels boss tells PM: NO more reform to Britain's EU membership after Brexit vote

2016-06-23

GETY

European Commission Jean-Claude Juncker repeated Brussels’ warning a Brexit vote will not extract greater concessions from the EU in a bid to keep Britain in the bloc.

The unelected official told reporters in Brussels: “The British policy makers and the British voters have to know that there will not be any kind of renegotiation.

"We have concluded a deal with the prime minister, he got the maximum he could receive, we gave the maximum we could give.

“So there will be no renegotiation, not on the agreement we found in February, nor as far as any kind of treaty negotiations are concerned.

“Out is out.”

A spokeswoman for the European Commission president also insisted the top eurocrat would not stand down in the event of a Brexit vote.

It comes amid fears in Brussels the UK walking away from the bloc could encourage other nations to quit.

Leading Brexit campaigners said Mr Juncker’s comments represented a slap down of the Prime Minister’s eve-of-referendum pledge to push for changes to migration rules if the UK stays in the EU beyond the historic referendum tomorrow.

In February Mr Cameron agreed his much-vaunted renegotiation deal at a European Council summit, which was widely dismissed as ‘pathetic’ and ‘watered down thin gruel’ by Conservative MPs.

Justice Secretary and co-chair of the Vote Leave campaign Michael Gove said: "The Remain campaign has been claiming in recent days that if you vote to stay in the EU then there could be further reform.

"The President of the EU, Jean-Claude Juncker, has made very clear today that will not happen.

"If you vote to stay there is no prospect of getting any reform from the EU ever again. We will never get back control of the £350 million we give to the EU every week.

"The Prime Minister tried to get reforms earlier this year but the EU did not listen. The EU cannot and will not give the British people the change that they want.

"There is a very clear choice in this referendum. Either you vote to keep on giving the EU more power and more of our money every year or join me in voting leave to take back control."

WHAT IS BREXIT?

 The British policy makers and British voters have to know that there will not be any kind of renegotiation

Jean-Claude Juncker

Former London mayor Boris Johnson said: "Who elected Jean-Claude Juncker to run anything in this way? Who put him in charge of us in this way?

"This gives the game away. If we stay in there is no prospect of any further change.

"This is it, folks. We have been told from the horse's mouth that any hope of further change is absolute illusion."

Ukip leader Nigel Farage said: “Jean-Claude Juncker directly contradicts the Prime Minister. There is no further renegotiation.

“Mr. Juncker confirms this is Britain's last chance saloon. We must vote to Leave EU.”

PA

The top EU official’s comments came after the Prime Minister said in a newspaper interview he can “guarantee” a Remain result will give him the mandate to push eurocrats for greater reform of the 28-country bloc.

Vowing he will demand changes to the EU’s freedom of movement rules, Mr Cameron told the Daily Telegraph: “Reform doesn’t end on Friday.

“The only way it ends is if we leave.”

He added: “And of course, top of the agenda will be let’s make Europe better at fighting terrorism, let’s sign these trade deals with the rest of the world, let’s deliver all the things we promised and more when it comes to changing the EU.

“That’s what Britain does.”

Daily Express covers

In his final campaign speech in London, Mr Farage had earlier branded Mr Cameron’s promise of further reform “another frankly dishonest pitch to the public” from the Prime Minister.

He said: “Margaret Thatcher at the height of her powers was incapable of reforming the political direction of the EU.

“Tony Blair who said at the start of his six-month presidency of the EU that he would turn the Union around, failed completely to do it and surrendered much of our rebate.

“The word reform in Brussels means something different, it means a greater, deeper drive towards centralisation.

“A deeper commitment to fulfilling the dreams of the original founders, the fulfilment of a United States of Europe.

“That is what it’s all about.”

Mr Farage also said if Britain votes to stay in the EU tomorrow, he expects the European Parliament to “begin unpicking” the Prime Minister’s February renegotiation deal within weeks.

It comes amid fears in Brussels the UK walking away from the bloc could encourage other nations to quit.

WHO'S WHO: BRUSSELS BUREAUCRATS

