EU chief admits need for Brussels' reform and hails 'liberal and daring Britain'

2016-06-24

GETTY

The President of the European Parliament, who has been an MEP since 1994, said the Brexit victory "saddened" him but added at least it now put to bed the institution's "complex and at times ambiguous relationship" with the UK.

In a lengthy statement posted on his Facebook page, Schulz hailed the importance Britain placed on freedom, saying the country had inspired the 27 other member states.

But he also urged those involved in the negotiations to make Brexit fast and pain-free, saying: "There is no time for delays."

He wrote: "After more than 40 years together, British citizens have decided to part ways with the European Union.

"It is a decision that saddens me, but at least it clarifies what has been a complex and at times ambiguous relationship."

He added: "Throughout its history, Britain's outward-looking approach and attachment to freedom have been an inspiration and bulwark for Europe.

"The UK will leave a European Union which it helped shape, but I am convinced that the values of that Britain, of that outward, liberal and daring Britain will continue to inspire us."

Brexit: What to expect next

The German politician made special mention of young voters in Britain, a sizeable majority of whom backed staying in the EU, saying it was a "source of comfort and sadness to know that young British voters, the ones who will be most affected, overwhelmingly stood on the side of Remain".

He continued: "The lesson I take from this referendum is that we have to reform the EU to make it fairer, not dismantle it.

"It is our duty to show that the unity between the EU's 27 Member States is stronger than our divisions.

"Our Union might not be perfect. The list of reforms needed is there and must be addressed.

"But it has delivered more than 60 years of peace and prosperity to its citizens and it can continue to do so.

"The key is reform for new ambition not unwinding."

His comments come as diplomats in Brussels took part in "Hug a Brit" day at EU Commission headquarters.

The Brexit shockwaves were still reverberating as eurocrats spontaneously adopted the social media campaign during the referendum which had called on member states to shower Britons with love to convince them to vote Remain.

