Brexit: Why should Britain leave the EU? Recap of key Brexit arguments

2016-06-18

Getty

After weeks of political campaigns and debates, it is almost time for the people of Britain to decide this country’s relationship with Europe. 

Eurosceptic Conservative MP Crispin Blunt takes a look at some of the key arguments why Britain should leave the 28-member bloc. 



Mr Blunt argued that Britain’s unique history, culture and strong economy would allow it to embrace a truly international identity outside of the EU.   

If Britain leaves the EU, Mr Blunt told Express.co.uk: “We have the opportunity to play a global role, which would be a positive role for the UK.”

Getty

He added: “We will remain part of all the key international groups from the UN Security Council downwards.

"In all these organisations, we will recover our voice that is currently exercised by the EU on our behalf.” 

The chairman of the Commons foreign affairs committee said that rest of the EU also needs focus on dealing with the eurozone crisis and policing the Schengen Area. 

He said: “We are outside both of these. But by and large we are getting in the way of the further integration needed to make these policies succeed for the long-term.” 

After the introduction in the national living wage, Mr Blunt warned that more European migrants would come to Britain because free movement is guaranteed by the EU. 

He said: “Obviously immigration is terribly important and it’s going to get worse if we stay in the EU because we have got free movement.” 

The Reigate MP said people who struggle to get into Britain’s job market are not mobile enough to work abroad and cannot “progress in our society” as they should. 

He said: “Whatever the economic benefit of immigration, we have then got a social price that we pay.” 



Reasons to remain or leave the EU

Mr Blunt said a key dilemma facing the EU was its lack of overt accountability for important decisions that affect Britain and other countries. 

He said: “There is a big democratic deficit in the EU and within its institutions. If we take ourselves out of that, it resolves that and British politicians are properly accountable to the public.” 

EU regulations are legal acts that are enforced in all EU countries simultaneously and EU directives are transferred into national law by each country as they see fit.  

The Conservative MP said British representatives may have had to compromise their position or may have been outvoted over some EU regulations and directives. 



Brexit campaigners have also argued that Britain would not longer have to contribute to the EU budget if quits the 28-member bloc.

The British public will vote in the EU referendum on Thursday June 23. Here are the latest polls, odds and predictions on if Britain will leave the EU. 

