'Calais will still be just 33km from Dover' EU advisor taunts Brits on migrants and Brexit

2016-06-21

GETTY

In a tongue in cheek quip aimed at Brexiteers ahead of the EU referendum, senior Brussels advisor Hugo Paemen taunted UK voters by saying: “On Friday, Calais will still be 33 kilometres from Dover.”

His taunts suggest he thinks Britain will still suffer from migrants making daily dangerous attempts to get from France to the UK and the two nations will still have to work together.

His comments come hours after chaos broke out in the French port town after migrants desperate to reach the UK targeted England and Wales football fans returning home from the Euros.

Gangs of migrants hurled rocks at passing cars while shouting “f*** the UK” before French riot police intervened. 

French politicians have previously suggested ending British border controls in Calais in the event of a Brexit - a move that could allow thousands of refugees to cross the Channel into the UK.

French finance minister Emmanuel Macron has prevoiusly said a leave vote may stop Le Toquet agreement which allows British immigration checkpoints in Calais and French checks in Dover.

GETTY

Moving border checks to the UK would mean refugees arriving on the other side of the Channel before being discovered would have the right to claim asylum in Britain. 

The left-wing politician said in March: “The day this relationship unravels, migrants will no longer be in Calais.” 

David Cameron has also warned a Brexit could see migrant camps move to Britain. 

The Prime Minister was accused of scaremongering over the claim that the French would want to pull out of the border control arrangement if Britain left the EU. 

 On Friday, Calais will still be 33 kilometres from Dover

Hugo Paemen

The claim was also dismissed by the French Government who said there were “no plans” to scrap the agreement.

The rejection appeared embarrassing for Mr Cameron, who made the agreement in a speech earlier this year in hope of convincing people concerned about immigration to back EU membership. 

Mirants clash with police in Calais

GETTY

Interior minister Bernard Cazeneuve said last year: “Calling for the border with the English to be opening is not a responsible solution.

“It would send a signal to people smugglers and would lead migrants to flow to Calais in far greater numbers.

“A humanitarian disaster would ensue. It is a foolhardy path, and one the government will not pursue.” 

