Majority of Europeans still happy to visit UK and give tourism boost even if we vote Leave

2016-06-21

Getty

An overwhelming 77 per cent of Europeans would like Britons to vote to stay on Thursday, a new poll by booking websites Kiwi.com and TravelBird.

The survey took into account the views of 54,000 people from all 27 EU countries apart from the UK.

However, most Europeans would not be put off visiting Britain if it opts out of the Brussels club.

The tiny country of Luxembourg - which also happens to be the seat of the European Court of Justice - was the country whose citizens would most like to see the UK stay in the EU, with 95 per cent hoping it will Remain.

 All the signs of ORB's latest and final poll point to a referendum that will truly come down to the wire

Lynton Crosby

Estonia followed closely behind, with 91 per cent of Estonians gunning for a Remain vote, while 88 per cent of Cypriots want the UK to stay.

An average of 77 per cent of those polled from all 27 countries said they would prefer for the UK to remain.

The majority of Europeans would still visit Britain if we left, the poll found.

However, Bulgaria and Romania stuck out as more reluctant to visit if Brexit happened, with 59 per cent of Bulgarians saying they would be less likely to visit and 54 per cent of Romanians feeling the same.

Getty

Belgians were not altogether too keen, with 41 per cent saying they would be be unlikely to visit, while 38 per cent of Cypriots felt the same.

The Europeans’ views came as UK polls flip-flopped between a majority wanting to leave the EU and wanting to stay.

A YouGov survey released on Tuesday for The Times, excluding undecided voters, reveals 51 per cent will vote to Leave the EU on Thursday with 49 per cent saying they will vote to Remain.

The poll also shows a two point lead for Brexit when 'Don't Knows' and those who will not vote are included, with 44 per cent saying they want to quit the EU and 42 per cent wanting to Remain.

Nine per cent said they are still undecided while four per cent said they would not vote.

The results show a switch back to Leave from YouGov's previous online survey, published over the weekend, which handed a two point lead to Remain.

Getty

Getty

But there appears to have been a general swing back to Remain as the EU referendum campaign enters its final week.

A week ago, Downing Street was said to have been left panicked by a YouGov poll that showed a staggering seven point lead for Brexit.

A Royal Wedding, The Wombles and a new James Bond

An ORB poll also published today found support for Remain at 53 per cent, up five points on the previous one, with support for Leave at 46 percent, down three points.Lynton Crosby, the political strategist who advised the Conservative Party at last year's general election, said: "All the signs of ORB's latest and final poll point to a referendum that will truly come down to the wire.”

He said the Leave camp had "failed to quash the common perception that it is the riskier of the two options.

Respected social research body NatCen also published a poll that found Remain on 53 per cent and Leave on 47 per cent, using a method that took on recommendations by an official inquiry into why pollsters got last year's election wrong.

