‘Get him out!’ Lee Nelson dragged away live on ITV after waving swastikas at Donald Trump

2016-06-24

The funnyman was grabbed and led away by two burly security men as he made a scene on ITV News as the Republican presidential hopeful attempted to make a speech about Britain’s decision to leave the EU.

He was seen holding up two red balls with the Nazi emblem on them and showing them to the camera crews and media awaiting Donald's speech. 

As he was led away, Lee could be seen with the spherical objects.  

FACEBOOK

“From the club house as part of the new Trump Turnberry range and I’ve forgot to hand them out,” he told the audience.

He then turned to Donald and said: “I’m very sorry Mr Trump and thank you, I apologise." 

“I can hand them out now as part of the new Trump range,” Lee said as he was forcibly removed.  

FACEBOOK

ITV News anchor Alistair Stewart, who was presenting the programme did not know what to make of the incident as it was playing out in front of him. He was too far away to see what was on the balls and could only make out their colour.

"A slight delay. This has become part of Mr Trump's campaign. There are those who do not like him or agree with him and one of them appears to have got through. And appears to be holding, I don't know, pink golf balls in the air. They've got rid of him," the bemused broadcaster said.  

The 70-year-old businessman was heard telling his people: “Get him out!”



ITV

ITV

ITV

John Di Domenico the world's busiest Donald Trump impersonator was so occupied doing his tribute act that he failed to go to the polls and vote for his lookalike.

Lee, real name Simon Brodkin, has pulled similar stunts in the past, most notably throwing a stash of US dollars over FIFA president Sepp Blatter and interrupting Kanye West’s set at Glastonbury last year. 

Each time he pulled a prank was dressed as his character Jason Bent but it's unclear which guise he had assumed for the Trump stunt.

Last night, the nation went to the polls and voted for Britain to leave the EU after 51.9 per cent voted to leave the EU compared to 48.1 per who wanted to stay. 

Since the results were announced Prime Minister David Cameron has announced that he is stepping down and that his replacement will be appointed by October.

