Brexit: What will happen to the weekly shop when Britain leaves the EU?

2016-06-24

PA

Treasury analysis has found that the average family’s weekly food and drink bill would rise by almost 3%, or £120 a year, in the event of Brexit. 

Mr Cameron had written in a national paper: “A weaker currency means more expensive imports; that means more expensive food and it drives higher business costs.

"And we all know where that ends up: higher prices in the shops.”  

But Brexit campaigners rejected the Government analysis and said that the EU actually pushed up supermarket prices due to its “protectionist policies”. 

Leave.EU co-chairman Richard Tice said: ”The Treasury has previously estimated that EU policies on food production and trade amount to an 'implicit tax' on food which stands at around 26 per cent, hitting the poorest in society hardest.

"More than this, EU food policies cost producers in developing countries billions in lost revenue, driving people into poverty abroad and driving up the foreign aid budget at home.

"For the Government, the In campaign or anyone else to try and suggest that the EU lowers our shopping bills isn't just a lie – it's an insult."

Getty 

But many food and drink industry experts believe that leaving the EU will lead to a rise in food prices, making the weekly shop more expensive for British families. 

Shore Capital analyst Clive Black said that the pound was expected to weaken against the dollar - the currency that most food commodities are priced in - when the UK leaves the EU.  

Mr Black said: “The most likely near-term impact is that the price of imported goods would go up. As a result of that food prices would rise.

"A weak pound would make UK exports more competitive but that would be a silver lining in a much bigger cloud.”  



PA

He added: “If the UK votes to leave the EU, we are in a very foggy situation.”   

Mr Black also argued that the incomes of British farmers could collapse without the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) subsidies from the EU. 

He said: “The EU overspends on agriculture. There is no reasonable basis to expect the UK Government to spend the same.” 

WHAT DO FARMERS THINK ABOUT BREXIT?

If the UK fails to negotiate a free trade agreement, the country has to fall back on its World Trade Organization (WTO) membership which involves high tariffs on food. 

For example, the 'most favoured nation' WTO tariffs for 2014 range from more than 35 per cent for dairy products to approximately seven per cent for oilseeds, oils and fats. 

Nevertheless Professor Alan Matthews, from Trinity College Dublin, has argued that the Brexit would have a “negligible” impact on food prices overall. 

In a presentation earlier this year, he said extra trade costs with the EU would be offset by the removal of the EU’s tariffs on certain foods sourced elsewhere. 

Pros and cons of Brexit

More than 70 per cent of food and drink manufacturers belonging to the Food and Drink Federation (FDF) believed that the UK should remain in the EU. 

FDF members highlighted the importance of the single market, access to raw materials and the free movement of labour. 

