Can you guess the most expensive city in the world for international workers?

2016-06-24

Getty

Mercer’s Cost of Living results are out and expats can listen up. 

The highly regarded survey lists the most expensive cities in the world for foreign employees. 

Using New York as a base city, it measures a cost of 200 items to compare 375 cities around the world. 

Examples include a two-bedroom apartment or three-bedroom house in an appropriate neighbourhood, an imported beer, a cup of coffee and a movie ticket. 

Getty

21 of the best cities in the world

The survey found factors like currency fluctuations, inflation and accommodation prices all contribute to the cost of employees taking international assignments. 

This year’s ranking includes 209 cities across five continents and taking out the number one spot for all the wrong reasons is Hong Kong. 

It’ll cost you US$7.77 or about £5.63 to buy a coffee in this Chinese city. 

Last year’s number one Luanda in Angola slipped to second spot, while Zurich and Singapore maintained their third and fourth consecutive rankings. 

Tokyo jumped six spots into fifth place thanks to the strengthening of the Japanese yen. 

Getty

Getty

Congo’s largest city Kinshasa soared a staggering seven ranks to sit in sixth place, making an appearance in the top 10 for the first time. 

Shanghai came in seventh followed by Geneva, with the African city of N’Djamena and Beijing rounding out the frontrunners section. 

London dropped five places to 17th spot this year for a number of reasons. 

“Despite some marked price increases across the region, several local currencies in Europe have weakened against the US dollar which pushed a few cities down in the ranking,” said Nathalie Constantin-Métral, Principal at Mercer.

Getty

“Additionally, other factors like recent security issues, social unrest, and concern about the economic outlook have impacted the region.”

On the other end of the spectrum sits Bishkek, Cape Town and Windhoek, which took out the last places of the 209-city list. 



1. Hong Kong

2. Luanda, Angola

3. Zurich

4. Singapore

5. Tokyo

6. Kinshasa

7. Shanghai

8. Geneva

9. N’Djamena

10. Beijing

...

207. Bishkek

208. Cape Town

209. Windhoek





The results come as the most expensive place to live in Europe has been revealed. 

London was pipped at the post by Luxembourg which topped the list of the priciest places to buy a home. 

