Top Tory blasts Government for casting doubt over British sovereignty of Gibraltar

2016-06-22

GETTY

Liam Fox accused the foreign secretary of making an "unacceptable" intervention in the heated debate over control of the Rock, which faces moves by Spain to wrestle control of the Meditteranean territory.

During a recent visit there last month, Mr Hammond warned that "Britain's ability to protect Gibraltar's interests will be seriously impaired if we are no longer members of the European Union, if we are no longer sitting around the table in Brussels when the decisions are made".

But Mr Fox, who served as defence secretary during the early years of the last Coalition government, responded: "I think that for any British Foreign Secretary to say that is unacceptable because you do not ever negotiate from what sounds like a position of weakness."

He told the Standard: "Our commitment has to be absolute. That's why the Prime Minister would have said, why I would have said, that our commitment is 100 per cent and there should be no misreading of that by Spain.

"There is no question of change in sovereignty. There is no question of a change in security."

12 reasons why you should vote IN or OUT of EU

The Spanish government declared last week that Gibraltar "remains Spanish, whether Brexit wins or loses".

On the subject of a post-Brexit deal, Spanish prime minister Mariano Rajoy said: "A period of negotiation would begin to determine the UK's position in relation to the EU concerning such vital matters as the presence of numerous British nationals living in other European Union countries, since we would have to clarify what rights they would have.

"It will not be an easy process. It would last quite some time, and we would have to work on it jointly with all the other EU countries."

GETTY

GETTY

Gibraltarians overwhemingly support Britain remaining a member of the Brussels bloc, with recent polling showing 98 per cent backing a Remain vote.

That view is also shared by the territory's chief minister, Fabian Picardo.

