Brexit: EU economic chaos - why the worst could be yet to come

2016-06-22

Getty

The Remain camp has issued a series of dire economic warnings over Brexit, even suggesting that it could plunge the UK into recession. 

But many Leave campaigners have asked why Britain should remain tied to a European bloc which is trying to deal with its own economic crisis. 

Eurosceptic Labour MP Gisela Stuart, who took part in the BBC’s debate last night, warned that the bills from the euro crisis will keep increasing.

Ms Stuart slammed the EU saying: “It was a noble dream in the last century, but it has failed. It has turned into a nightmare.”

Pro-EU politicians argue that Britain is outside of the eurozone - which covers 19 of the EU’s 28 member states - and no longer has to pay for bailouts. 

Nevertheless Brexit campaigners have called for Britain to break free from a union whose single currency has been on the verge of collapse. 

Here is a look at the future of the eurozone as the EU also struggles to deal with the migrant crisis and rising Eurosceptism across the Continent. 



The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has warned that political risks facing the euro area have increased markedly against a “weak” economic backdrop.

As well as fears of global slowdown, the migrant crisis could jeopardise free movement in the single market and Brexit could fuel Euroscpetism.  

The latest IMF statement, issued this month, said: “The euro area is at a critical juncture. 



Getty

“Growing political divisions and Euroscepticism have weakened prospects for collective action, leaving the euro area increasingly vulnerable.”  

The European debt crisis, which hit in 2009, has left behind high levels of private and public debt that continues to hamper economic recovery. 

As well as continuing large-scale unemployment, there are still a large number of bad loans - which are not likely to be paid back - from some European banks.

The IMF warned that the euro could face “instability and repeated crises of confidence” if action is not taken to boost growth and strengthen integration.  

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

Most of the eurozone has hardly grown in economic terms since the Eurozone crisis, which erupted in 2009. 

Ms Stuart, the co-chair of Vote Leave, last night made the case for Brexit by saying that only Antarctica had a slower growth rate than the EU. 

Fact-checking organisation Full Fact responded: “The EU recently had the lowest growth of every continent but has now overtaken South America.” 



The EU recently had the lowest growth of every continent but has now overtaken South America https://t.co/YxwD3vuSBm #BBCDebate

Earlier this month European Central Bank (ECB) president Mario Draghi warned that the pace of the eurozone’s recovery may be slowing.

He said: “The risks to the euro area growth outlook remain tilted to the downside, but the balance of risks has improved.” 

The region grew 0.5% between the fourth quarter of 2015 and the first quarter of this year. 

But there is still uncertainty over the future of struggling economies in countries such as Spain, Italy and debt-ridden Greece.    



EXPRESS

The UK paid out a total of about £5billion through the EU to bail out Ireland in November 2010 and Portugal in May 2011.  

But in 2011 EU leaders agreed that the UK and other non-eurozone countries should not have to pay for future bailouts. 

Remain supporters have also pointed out that David Cameron’s EU deal restated Britain’s right not to join the eurozone. 

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

It states that countries outside the single currency will not be required to fund euro bailouts and will be reimbursed for central EU funds used to prop up the euro.

Many Britons see the euro crisis as vindication that the UK was right not to join the single currency. 

A number of Eurosceptics has argued that Britain is standing in the way of further EU integration needed make the euro project work.

