Tories in Brexit turmoil - Andrew Feldman quits as chairman – will more follow?

2016-06-24

GETTY • PA

The Prime Minister’s resignation looks set to spark a toppling of Tories, with a number of high profile members’ future called into question.

Andrew Feldman, chairman of the Conservative Party, will resign along with Mr Cameron later this year, a Conservative spokesperson confirmed.

A statement said: “Andrew Feldman always said that he would serve alongside the Prime Minister for as long as he was needed. 

"The Prime Minister has asked him to stay as Chairman of the Conservative Party whilst the leadership campaign takes place. He will ensure that the Party Conference is properly delivered in the autumn.

“Lord Feldman will step down when the Prime Minister leaves Downing Street.”

The future of Chancellor George Osborne also hangs in the balance after a Brexit victory.

Mr Osborne, who campaigned alongside Mr Cameron for the Remain camp, tweeted today: “It was a hard fought campaign. It is not the outcome I wanted but I respect decision of British people and will do all I can to make it work.”

Ahead of the historic decision senior Vote Leave campaigner Steve Baker said it was “very important” for Mr Cameron to continue as the UK leader - but said it is not important for Mr Osborne to stay on. 

GETTY

 Andrew Feldman always said that he would serve alongside the Prime Minister

Mr Baker, who is also the co-chairman of Conservatives for Britain, said: “George Osborne had a rough ride from everyone over his punishment Budget. 

“I spoke to many Remain Conservative MPs who thought it was a ludicrous idea. George Osborne will have to rescue quite a lot with MPs on both sides.”

Mr Cameron’s resignation has also fired the starting gun on the race to succeed him as Tory leader and Prime Minister. 

The Remain campaigner said he wants his successor - who will negotiate Britain’s exit from the EU - in place by October. 

Favourites to take over the Tory leadership include prominent Brexit campaigner Boris Johnson and Michael Gove. 

In a rousing victory speech, Mr Johnson welcome Brexit as a “glorious opportunity” for the nation.

PA

Home Secretary Theresa May and pro-Brexit energy minister Andrea Leadsom are also contenders. 

Mr Cameron will stay on as leader until the Conservatives party conference in November. 

Addressing Britons this morning, a sombre Mr Cameron said: “I will do everything I can as Prime Minister to steady the ship over the coming weeks and months, but I don't think it would be right for me to try to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination."

