Osborne admits he has NO PLAN for Brexit despite scaremongering

2016-06-20

GETTY

In a stunning interview with LBC host Iain Dale, the Chancellor said “you can’t plan” for Britain leaving the European Union, despite spending the last several weeks telling voters quitting the 28-country bloc would be economically devastating. 

He said: “The thing we’re planning for is the contingency plans for the financial stability consequences in the immediate aftermath. 

“We do not have plans for what we would then do.”

A shocked Mr Dale said: “Really? I'm astonished. The polls are neck and neck, surely a responsible government would be planning for what would happen?"

Referencing the uncertainty about how the rest of the EU will react, Mr Osborne repeated: “Britain does not have a plan for Brexit. You can’t plan when you can’t answer the basic questions.

“First thing on Friday morning you would have to see what the financial would be.”

He repeated the claims that the UK would suffer economic catastrophe if Brexit is voted through on Thursday - with the impact beginning as early as the next day. 

Mr Osborne said: “There would be an immediate question mark over the state of our public finances.

"It would start to come this Friday - that’s when the uncertainty would start.”

When asked by Mr Dale whether redundancy notices would be handed out on Friday in companies reliant on the EU, he said: “I think that will start to happen very quickly.

GETTY

GETTY

“Brexit is okay if you’re very rich but for the rest of the country, who will have to live with the consequences, they won’t have anywhere else to go.”

Mr Dale picked Osborne up on various claims during the 30-minute interview, including the assertion that Russian leader Vladimir Putin supported Brexit. 

Mr Osborne said: “Our enemies want us to leave. President Putin has given as much as a nod and a wink to say he wants Britain to leave. 

“He was answering questions the other day saying he would ‘refuse to be drawn’.”

Mr Dale then incredulously responded: “How is that a nod and a wink?”

GETTY

When Mr Osborne said “the facts are, this country will be poorer if we leave the EU”, Mr Dale responded quickly: “That’s not a fact, that is an opinion.”

He also described himself as critical of the EU but warned leaving the group was not the way to reform Brussels’ issues. 

Mr Osborne said: “I would describe myself as a Eurosceptic who wants to go on fighting for reform. This fighting won’t stop if we vote remain.”

