'Why should WE flood UK? We don't want your chocolate' Turkey's top adviser in shock rant

2016-06-22

Ilnur Cevik also launched an astonishing attack on Britain, saying everything the UK had Turkey had too.

Discussing the chances of millions of Turks flooding to Britain if Turkey joined the EU, Mr Cevik said: "Why should we be flooding Britain? There is no reason.

"Whatever exists in Britain exists in Turkey.

"We are not going to go there just because you produce Cadbury chocolates and Maltesers for God’s sake!"

BBC•GETTY

 We are not going to go there just because you produce Cadbury chocolates and Maltesers for God’s sake!

Ilnur Cevik

Speaking to Newsnight, Mr Cevik, a key adviser to President Erdogan, claimed Mr Cameron had been Turkey's "chief supporter" in its quest for EU membership.

"We are really flabbergasted, let’s put it that way," he continued.

"Turks felt that the British were the driving force behind our EU membership and that they were driving us right to the hilt.

"The way Mr Cameron put it, we feel really, really taken in.

"The way he’s saying it, 'they were never going to get in anyway, we just said that we’ll go along with them', that kind of attitude is deeply hurting the Turks."

Mr Çevik said he does not want his country as a factor in people’s decisions as Britain prepares for Thursday’s vote.

GETTY

He said: "It is not our place to say [if Britain should leave the EU]. But we should not be used as an alibi.

"We should be removed from the equation."

In the past Mr Cameron has said he wants to "pave the way from Ankara to Brussels" but in recent weeks has rolled back on the prospect of Turkey joining the EU.

The country, which shares a border with war-torn Syria, will not have a chance of joining the EU until the "year 3000", the prime minister has said.

Speaking to Andrew Marr last week he explained: "There is no prospect of Turkey joining the EU in decades.

"You cannot find an expert on this subject – you’ve been quoting loads of experts – you cannot find one, because it is not going to happen."

Despite his protestations, the website for the British Embassy in Ankara does state: "We have a dedicated team working on projects to improve Turkey’s prospects of joining the EU."

Ukip leader and Brexit campaigner Nigel Farage has previously warned the fast-tracking of Turkey’s membership could be the "most dangerous decision" Brussels has ever made.

Speaking in December 2015 he said: "A country with ninety-seven per cent of its land mass in Asia, apparently you want to join Europe.

"It is a country that appears to be keener on bombing the Kurds than it is in taking on ISIS."

