'Frustration with EU is on the rise EVERYWHERE' Holland demands reform with or WITHOUT UK

2016-06-20

GETTY 

Adrian Schout, head of a Dutch think-tank, said a possible British exodus from the 28-nation bloc had unmasked “frustration with the EU which is on the rise everywhere”.

Hinting that people in The Netherlands were also growing discontent under the control of the doomed bloc, Mr Schout said Britons were “holding up a mirror to us” and called for “pragmatisation and understanding” after the vote.

Writing for Clingendael, the head of the European Studies Programme, said: “Caricatures such as Boris Johnson are playing with fire.

“And yet we, the rest of the EU, will have to make an effort to understand the motivation behind the referendum.

GETTY 

 Frustration with the EU is on the rise everywhere, and it is no surprise that the referendum should coincide with the eurocrisis and the migration crisis

Adrian Schout, head of a Dutch think-tank

“The UK is showing that the situation is now more serious: even the narrative of Europe as an economic success is wearing thin.”

Mr Schout said Brussels had lessons to learn after the escalating migrant crisis and euro crisis.

He said: “Frustration with the EU is on the rise everywhere, and it is no surprise that the referendum should coincide with the eurocrisis and the migration crisis.

“The undertow can be explained by the mirage of trust in the economic benefits of integration. The heated debates in the UK underline the extent to which the European narrative has dwindled to its current state.

“It is precisely this point that is the eye-opener in the UK referendum: it is the free-market loving British who do not believe in the European economic narrative.

“The British debate exposes the extent to which the economic justification of integration is disputed. Belief in the economic benefits is the Achilles' heel of European integration.”

He said a rise in migration had fuelled an uprising against the bloc across the continent, with even his own country attempting to “tighten up EU rules” so Dutch workers “get a little more protection”.

Earlier this week it was revealed that the vast majority of Dutch people want Britain to take back control from Brussels on Thursday.

The sensational poll laid bare Netherlands’ anger towards the EU amid the refugee crisis and concerns over the Eurozone.

GETTY

Echoing this rhetoric, Mr Schout said: “The four freedoms guaranteed by the single market, labour migration is the most sensitive.Cameron promised that the total burden of labour migration would remain under 100,000, yet 333,000 migrants came to the UK in 2015.

“Large numbers of labour migrants come from Eastern Europe, but most come from other parts of the world. Notwithstanding studies on their economic contribution, members of the Leave camp primarily want to make decisions themselves on who is allowed to enter the country.

"And the influx from the EU is seen as proof that European markets do not create jobs themselves.

“Free movement of workers is a sensitive subject in many EU countries.

"In the Netherlands, Minister Asscher is also trying to tighten up the EU rules on this point so that Dutch workers get a little more protection.”

GETTY 

Mr Schout said Brussel bigwigs had a lot of questions to answer after the monumental referendum.

He continued: “Citizens do not want to hear yet again how marvellous the EU is; they want to learn what the EU is actually turning into: are we actually going to have 'Ever closer union'?

“Will the EU become a sort of state? Will there be a European Finance Minister, levying Europe-wide taxes? Many citizens don't those kinds of narrative for the EU.

“In many EU countries, debates focus on fields such as subsidiarity, acknowledgement of differences between countries and retention of a sense of identity, including the ways in which states configure their markets.

“The old character of the EU as a single market has lost its lustre.”

He added: “It seems that the British people are happy to gamble with world history and with their own continued existence as a country.

“It is in the interests of both the Netherlands and Europe as a whole to discourage secession from the EU. Yet, following the vote either to leave or remain on 23 June, European fury must yield to pragmatism and understanding.”

It comes after it emerged supporters of a Nexit - as it is known in the Netherlands - would seek to ride on momentum from Brexit ahead of the next Dutch election.

Geert Wilders, leader of the anti-EU Party for Freedom, said Brexit could “liberate” Europe from Brussels.

