Tory Baroness Warsi quits Leave camp - but Out camp say they NEVER knew she signed up

2016-06-20

GETTY 

However the decision was met with bewilderment by Leave campaigners who said they never knew Aayeeda Warsi was part of their campaign in the first place.

Her decision comes after a Ukip poster claiming migration was pushing Europe to “breaking point” sparked controversy on all sides.

She said: “That breaking point poster really was – for me – the breaking point to say: ‘I can’t go on supporting this.'

The former Cabinet minister told The Times: “We all feel very passionately about these issues, it’s when you start to believe that any means are acceptable to achieve an end. It’s not an easy decision.

GETTY 

 Unfortunately what we are seeing as a vision for Britain are lies and xenophobic campaigning

Baroness Warsi

“When I look at the people who are now saying the things they are saying and the people who are supporting that approach, the BNP, Donald Trump, Marine le Pen, Austria’s Freedom Party - every day it feels like the far right is coming out to stand by Leave.”

With just three days to go until the monumental referendum, she accused the Out camp of spreading “hate and xenophobia”.

Lady Warsi, who resigned from the government in 2014 over its positon on Gaza, added: “Unfortunately what we are seeing as a vision for Britain are lies and xenophobic campaigning. Why is it people like me, who are instinctively Eurosceptic, are feeling they need to leave Leave?

"Because day after day, what are we hearing? The refugees are coming, the rapists are coming, the Turks are coming."

After she announced her departure, Vote Leave tweeted: “Genuinely puzzled by Sayeeda ‘defection’. We weren’t aware she ever part of the #VoteLeave campaign…”



PA 

GETTY 

Eurosceptic Tory MP Nadhim Zahawi echoed this, adding: “Been part of the leave campaign from the start. I had no idea that @SayeedaWarsi was part of the leave campaign. News to all of us me thinks.”

Conservative MEP Daniel Hannan added: “When I invited Sayeeda Warsi to join the Leave campaign, she declined. Fair enough, obviously. But how is this a ‘defection’?”

Ukip leader Nigel Farage has defended the breaking point poster, saying the scene was a “direct result” German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s ill-fated decision to open her country’s doors to Syrian refugees.

He described it as “one of the biggest political failures of modern times,” adding: “The point of the poster was to say rear Europe isn’t working. Something that’s true cant be a scare.”

