Tory guru told Cameron FOUR YEARS AGO 'impossible' to meet immigration promise while in EU

2016-06-21

GETTY

Civil servants told the Prime Minister “directly and explicitly” his pledge would fail, according to Mr Cameron's former policy advisor Steve Hilton.

But despite stark warnings, the under-fire Tory leader insisted just weeks ago he would stand by his “ambition” to cut net migration to Britain to below 100,000.

Last month net figures hit a jaw-dropping 333,000.

 We were told, directly and explicitly, that it was impossible for the Government to meet its immigration target as long as we remained members of the EU

Steve Hilton

Anti-EU campaigner Mr Hilton said the Prime Minister reaffirmed his commitment to the target in the 2015 general election, even though he "had been told it was undeliverable".

Mr Hilton also spoke out against Britain’s “broken” immigration system.

GETTY

He said: “We were told, directly and explicitly, that it was impossible for the Government to meet its immigration target as long as we remained members of the EU, which of course insists on the free movement of people within it.

“You don't need to sit in a 'stock take' meeting at No 10 Downing Street to see the obvious truth: our immigration system is completely broken, and as long as we're in the EU, our elected governments are powerless to fix it.

The Brexit supporter added: "In the 2015 Conservative manifesto, the Prime Minister reaffirmed his commitment to the immigration target he had been told was undeliverable.

"When I saw that, I assumed this was either because he was certain he could negotiate a solution within the EU, or was assuming we would leave.”

GETTY

Getty

Writing in the Daily Mail, he said: ”For the Government to continue to make the promise today, after no negotiated solution was achieved and while campaigning to stay, is, I think, what Michael Gove and Boris Johnson meant when they described this as corrosive of trust in politics."

Mr Hilton, who helped transform the Conservative party in the 2000s, stunned the Prime Minister last month by branding Britain “ungovernable” as long as it sticks with the bureaucratic Brussels club.

The 46-year-old said: "The arrogant and dismissive treatment of Britain’s relatively modest demands in the 2015/2016 negotiations shows that the EU is just not interested in anything other than superficial change.

"You might as well hope for Vladimir Putin to embrace liberal democracy."



Lynton Crosby, a political strategist who advised the ruling Conservative Party at the last national election in 2015, said: "All the signs of ORB's latest and final poll point to a referendum that will truly come down to the wire.”

He said the "Leave" camp had "failed to quash the common perception that it is the riskier of the two options.

Respected social research body NatCen also published a poll that found Remain on 53 percent and Leave on 47 percent, using a method that took on recommendations by an official inquiry into why pollsters got last year's election wrong.

