‘Where’s Piers Morgan gone?’ Good Morning Britain cut-off mid-way through Brexit coverage

2016-06-24

The 51-year-old former Britain’s Got Talent judge and co-star Susanna Reid were taken off the air mid-sentence as they talked about Boris Johnson upcoming statement.

Susanna, 45, was heard saying: “A historic, seismic, momentous day for the UK as it votes to leave…” before the screen went blank for several seconds.

The scene then cut to news anchor Alistair Stewart on ITV News as he introduced the audience to his show. 

ITV

Viewers watching the programme were left slightly unnerved by the rough cut from one programme to another.

Several people took to social media to comment on the gaffe, with one person posting on Twitter: “Why did you get cut? #gmb.”

Another equally concerned viewer tweeted: “Where's @piersmorgan gone?! #GMB.”

ITV

ITV

WTF?? #GMB taken off air just as Boris was coming out!!

Nice smooth transition at the end of #GMB ?????? literally just got cut off mid sentence...

Where's @piersmorgan gone?! #GMB

Why did you get cut ? #gmb

that cut to the news from #gmb freaked me out. i was expecting general zod for a min

That was rude there, Susanna Reid interrupted by Alistair Stewart as @GMB ends its broadcast.

 Where's @piersmorgan gone?

Twitter user

Someone else joked: “Nice smooth transition at the end of #GMB literally just got cut off mid sentence…”

One user said: “That cut to the news from #gmb freaked me out. I was expecting general zod for a min.”

Good Morning Britain’s Piers and Susanna Reid were covering the results of the European Union referendum and Britain’s decision to leave the organisation. 

The world reacts to Britain's EU Referendum result

Today, it was announced that the UK had decided to leave the UK after 5.1 per cent voted to leave the EU compared to 48.1 per who wanted to stay. 

Since the results were announced Prime Minister David Cameron has announced that he is stepping down and that his replacement will be appointed by October.

Good Morning Britain is on ITV on weekdays on 6am.

