Battle of Britain: Brexit divides country as class divisions begin to emerge

2016-06-24

GETTY

The Leave campaign scored a massive victory after securing wins in Middlesborough, Sunderland and Swindon, traditionally working class areas, while Remain only held on to the lead by 51 per cent to 49 per cent in Newcastle.

In Middlesbough, Leave won 65 per cent of the votes while Remain secured just 35 per cent.

Remain clinched 75 per cent of the vote in the well-heeled City of London, where Remain snatched only 25 per cent of the vote.

Speaking as he arrived at a results night party, the Ukip leader said: "The eurosceptic genie is out of the bottle and it's not going back".

He said EU leaders were "scared" and that if Britain didn't quit the bloc first another country soon would.

A YouGov poll released at 10pm, the final of the referendum campaign, revealed Remain was expected to take 52 per cent of the vote and the Leave camp 48 per cent of the vote.



GETTY

But massive support for Brexit in Sunderland, one of the earliest local authorities to declare, offered encouragement for Leave supporters.

Mr Farage, having seemingly complained earlier about the two million voters allowed to register, took to Twitter to thank his supporters.



GETTY

He said: "With a massive turnout I'd like to thank everybody who has engaged in the greatest democratic exercise in my lifetime.”

A delighted Richard Elvin, of Ukip and a Leave campaign co-ordinator in the North East, said: "We were hopeful of winning but we didn't dare to think we could win by such a big margin."

Mr Elvin said Nissan was a major employer on Wearside and voters were not put off from backing Leave despite "scaremongering" from Remain about the threat to jobs if the UK left the EU.



Pros and cons of Brexit

In campaigner Bridget Phillipson, Labour MP for Houghton and Sunderland South, said people in Sunderland were angry with the government.

She said: "Wages remain low, there's unemployment and we are not getting the support from the Tory government.

"They feel the Tory government continues to kick our region."



