‘Please don’t go!’ European newspapers BEG Britain to stay with special front pages

2016-06-21

DER SPIEGEL / GETTY

Swedish newspaper Dagens Industri today covered its entire front page with a Union Jack and the slogan “Take a chance on EU!”, following similar stunts by Dutch tabloid Algemeen Dagblad and German publication Der Spiegel earlier this month. 

Along with the ABBA reference, the Swedish broadsheet’s front page begged: “Dear Brits, Sweden and the EU need you - and you still need us.”

In a special online editorial, the paper’s political editor Peter Magnus Nilsson urged British citizens to consider the two countries’ similarities, from the weather to their taste in music.

He said: “We share the same rainy low pressure trajectory from the North Atlantic, the same longing for Gran Canaria, have the same good popular cultural taste in music, we understand the importance of free markets, independent companies, free routes, a strong navy and that meetings should start on time.

“We are a little skeptical towards the latent socialist continental Europeans, we lean heavily on America and we have no intention of getting rid of our royal families, our currencies or the Christian cross on the flags.

“We are all like you – proud and headstrong with special relationships to each other. And we have a club. Don’t leave it”.

Dagens Industri

Algemeen Dagblad used a similar tactic on its front page last week, when it splashed with: “Don’t leave me this way.”

The Dutch paper said the EU without Britain would be like tea without milk as it also chose a Union Jack design. 

Its editorial read: “Hello Britain, this is your neighbour calling. Please don’t leave us.

“Since our King William III of Orange married your Queen Mary II we have been related anyway.

Algemeen Dagblad

“Nobody in Europe appreciates your culture more than we do. The Beatles, Bridget Jones, One Direction, EastEnders, Brideshead Revisited, we love it all. Many of us know Monty Python’s Dead Parrot sketch by heart.

“We admire your stiff upper lip. And every year we remember, with the greatest respect, all those who have fallen to liberate our country.

“We not only love you, we need you. Who else supports us in keeping some common sense on this turbulent continent of ours?

Der Spiegel

 An EU without the UK would be like tea without milk

Algemeen Dagblad

“An EU without the UK would be like tea without milk. Bitter. So please, stay. Stay with us.”

And earlier this month, influential Der Spiegel plastered “Please don’t go!” on its front page, along with another Union Jack. 

A special editorial said Brexit “would be a catastrophe for everyone - including the UK itself."

