Remaining in EU will create a MASSIVE housing crisis, new figures reveal

2016-06-16

GETTY

Research by Brexit campaign group Vote Leave has shown that 1.2 million homes will be needed by 2030 if Britain fails to throw off Brussels rule. 

The figure gets worse if the EU allows in five new member states - Turkey, Macedonia, Montenegro, Albania and Serbia - with at least 2.5 million homes needed under that scenario. 

Vote Leave estimate that the 1.2 million and 2.5 million extra homes will require between 78,000 and 161,000 hectares of the green belt. 

This would mean at least five per cent of the open protected countryside will need to be built on to house the migrants surging in from Europe. 

The cost to the taxpayer is also estimated to be between £331 billion and £685 billion with housing prices also rocketing again. 

Former Work and Pensions Secretary Iain Duncan Smith MP said: “These figures show the true impact that uncontrolled migration will have on our communities. 

GETTY

“If Turkey, Macedonia, Montenegro, Albania and Serbia join the EU we could need an extra 2.5 million homes - much of which will need to be built on the greenbelt. This will push house prices up and make it harder for people to get on the housing ladder.. 

 These figures show the true impact that uncontrolled migration will have on our communities

Iain Duncan Smith MP

“That's why we need to Vote Leave on Thursday 23rd June to take back control and ensure our greenbelt is protected for future generations." 

Vote Leave have based their figures on Treasury projections on the future of net migration if Britain remains in the EU. 

The latest figures put net migration into the UK at more than 330,000, the equivalent of a city the size of Newcastle. 

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

According to Vote Leave, these problems will only get worse when Turkey, Albania, Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia join the EU with their combined populations is over 80 million. 

The projection is based on the average household size in 2015 which was 2.37 people and the Office of National Statistics forecast that, by 2037 that will be 2.21. 

A Vote Leave spokesman said: “It must be stressed that these forecasts exclude the natural increase in the UK population (from UK births and greater life expectancy) and net migration from non-EU countries. 

GETTY

“The numbers i refer to the number of houses needed to accommodate an increase in EU migration alone. 

The total growth in the number of households and resulting pressure on the greenbelt will therefore be considerably higher." 

