Brexit: Why is David Cameron stepping down now Britain has voted to leave the EU?

2016-06-24

reuters

Pro-EU Prime Minister Mr Cameron has resigned as Britain's Prime Minister in the wake of the EU referendum. He said a new leader should be in place by October.

He said: "I will do everything I can as Prime Minister to steady the ship over the coming weeks and months, but I don't think it would be right for me to try to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination."

Losing the referendum was a massive defeat for Mr Cameron who put his credibility on the line by leading the so-called Project Fear campaign. 

Mr Cameron has been pitted against his own Eurosceptic Tory MPs as the referendum debate tore the Conservative Party apart over the past few months.   

Voters who want to remain in the EU have also been angered by the fact that the Prime Minister decided to call a referendum in the first place. 

On referendum night it emerged that a letter, signed by Tory 84 MPs, told David Cameron that it was his "duty" to stay on as prime minister after the referendum. 

But amid rumours of Tory plot to oust Mr Cameron, senior Tory MP Andrew Bridgen had said: “If the country votes to leave the EU, he should – and probably will – choose to resign.”

A Conservative leadership ballot would have be triggered if 50 MPs write letters of no confidence to the chairman of the 1922 Committee of Conservative backbenchers. 

Mr Bridgen, who has written a letter calling for a vote of no confidence, said: “Whatever the result I believe his position will be untenable.”  



Bookmakers had slashed the odds on Mr Cameron quitting by the end of this month after the Brexit camp surged ahead in the opinion polls last week.

The odds for the Prime Minister to step down by the end of June 2016 are now 5/2, according to bookie William Hill on Monday June 20.  

AFP Getty

Mr Cameron standing down by the end of the year was priced at 6/4 - marking a dramatic shift from 10/1 in February when he announced the referendum.  

It has been the “secret gamble” of the campaign because punters have drawn their own conclusions over Mr Cameron’s future, said William Hill spokesman Graham Sharpe. 

“Even if Remain wins - if they do not win by a relatively convincing margin - then David Cameron will find it difficult to survive in office,” Mr Sharpe said. 

David Cameron is mobbed by screaming school girls at Harris Academy

The Prime Minister had repeatedly insisted that he would stay on, regardless of the EU referendum result on this morning. 

He told the Sunday Times: “That’s what I’ve said and that’s what I am going to do.” 

A number of leading Vote Leave figures - including Boris Johnson, Michael Gove, Chris Grayling and Iain Duncan Smith – had backed his bid to stay on. 







Mr Grayling believed that Mr Cameron’s “expertise and relationships in the EU” would make him invaluable in Brexit talks in the event of a Leave vote. 

“I want David Cameron to stay as prime minister and lead us out of the European Union,” he told the Financial Times. 

Mr Cameron has confirmed that he will not stand for a third term as Prime Minister, which means he plans to go sometime before the general election in 2020. 

