'Is this amateur hour?' Remain MP grilled over Osborne's budget farce

2016-06-16

The Chancellor has warned he would inflict a severe, post-Brexit budget on Britain in the wake of the EU referendum if the UK votes to Leave on June 23.

More than 60 Conservative MPs have said they would not support the budget, as have Labour and the SNP.

Miss Morgan was grilled by Iain Dale on LBC as she tried to diffuse the furious backlash to Mr Osborne’s announcement.

She said: "This is a cross-party warning that has been issued.

GETTY•LBC

"No Conservative likes to cut spending or put taxes up."

Miss Morgan was then asked if the Chancellor’s failure to inform Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, who is also supporting Remain, in advance of his announcement was "amateur hour".

She continued: "He is not trying to fool the public at all. He is trying to set out the very serious consequences of a vote to leave next week.

"Of course there are going to be Conservatives who are going to say that … we don’t want to put taxes up.

"But Conservatives also realise we have spent the last six years, working part of the time in coalition, trying to fix the economy.

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

 To have to go back and do that all over again because of a self-inflicted recession would be madness

Nicky Morgan

"To have to go back and do that all over again because of a self-inflicted recession would be madness.

"It would be hugely irresponsible if the Chancellor did not set out these consequences."

Pressure is mounting on Mr Osborne following the furious reaction triggered by his post-Brexit budget warnings.

Former Scottish First Minister Alex Salmond has said the Chancellor’s political career is over.

Speaking on Wednesday, Mr Osborne said: "A vote to leave would hurt businesses, hurt investment and cost jobs. There would be difficult decisions – decisions that begin next Friday.

"There would have to be an emergency Budget to fill a £30billion black hole.

"Today we are setting out the difficult decisions we would have to take."

