History shows Brexit WILL happen and PM is 'lazy' for not realising, says ex-World Bank VP

2016-06-21

Getty

Ian Goldin, author of 20 highly acclaimed books, said the Prime Minister promised in 2013 to hold the EU Referendum in exchange for the support of Euro-sceptics, which is precisely why Brexit will happen after the vote in three days time.

The Oxford professor and former advisor to Nelson Mandela has likened the upcoming referendum to the Renaissance five centuries ago, saying both periods are “not an ordinary time”.

 With this referendum promise, David Cameron betrayed a lazy, linear vision of the future

Ian Goldin

He said: “With this referendum promise, David Cameron betrayed a lazy, linear vision of the future.

“Cameron, the elected leader of 65million people and the world’s fifth-largest economy, failed to grasp that lazy visions of the future are more likely to be wrong than right. 

Getty

“Had he looked to history—to a similar Renaissance moment of similar stresses—he might have stretched his imagination to encompass the future that has, now, arrived.

“Now, like then, public leaders and public institutions have failed to keep up with rapid change, and popular trust has been deeply eroded.”

The general public has also failed to predict the future, he added.

Mr Goldin’s new "landmark" book, Age of Discovery, co-written with fellow Oxford professor Chris Kutarna, focuses on how modern-day politicians can learn from history and it is essential to look back to form the best future for ourselves.

The pair have branded the current era the “New Renaissance”, as they compare people and situations such as Johannes Gutenberg, who introduced the printing press to Europe in 1439, and Facebook inventor Mark Zuckerberg. 

Getty

Getty

They have also companed the Bonfire of the Vanities, when “sinful” objects such as books and art were burned in the late 15th Century to the 21st Century's rise of Islamic State (ISIS).

Mr Goldin, who was awarded the Chevalier de l’Ordre national du Mérite by the French Government, said: “Not only has David Cameron failed to predict the future. We have too. 

“When Savonarola and a small group of extremists took over Florence and lit the Bonfire of the Vanities that sparked the end of Renaissance tolerance, it was the silent majorities indifference to the threat that let them do.

“Age of Discovery shows that we urgently need to learn from history. 

“The political revolutions which accompany technological and economic revolutions - as well as the information technologies and disruptive changes which amplify progress - can also catapult extremists and extremist opinion into power.”

