EU REFERENDUM: Polls close after day of weather chaos and fraud claims

2016-06-24

EXPRESS



POLLING STATION CLOSED DUE TO FLOODING

Continuing downpours across southern and eastern parts of England have led to the closure of a polling station in Cringleford, Norfolk, according to reports.

Laura Hagen posted pictures on Twitter of locals wading ankle-deep in water out of The Willow Centre.

She wrote: "Cringleford polling station closed due to flooding. Relocating to venue opposite Jewsons on Newmarket Rd."

Another local resident, Liz Cox, posted a video of cars driving through fast-running water in the village.

The Met Office have issued six flood warnings and 11 flood alerts across eastern England tonight as thunderstorms continue to batter the region.

Cringleford polling station closed due to flooding. Relocating to venue opposite Jewsons on Newmarket Rd #EUref pic.twitter.com/xhzb5Bovz4

@EDP24 Cringleford pic.twitter.com/MVqCfLkTmZ

POLLING STATIONS SHUT AFTER STABBINGThe 18-year-old man was rushed to hospital with serious injuries, while police temporarily shut down polling station the Waverley Road in Huddersfield. 

Police arrested a 19-year-old man and said they believed the attack was not related to the referendum. 

The polling station was closed for around half an hour but has now been re-opened.

EPA

PA

PA

#USEPENS ROW

Police were also called to another polling booth earlier today after a Leave campaigner attempted to hand out pens, following fears pencil votes would be erased. 

The Leave campaigner claimed someone from the Remain side had called police when he began handing out pens to all voters. 

The hastag #UsePens is now trending on Twitter over fears pencil votes for Leave may be scrubbed out. 

However, a local council has also warned voters not to use pen, over concerns the ink could smudge. 

Midway through polling day, East Northamptonshire Council tweeted: "Please use a pencil on your ballot paper as ink can smudge when its folded which could make the paper doubtful & it may not be counted."

The confusion caused Manchester City Council and Hillingdon Council, west London, to tweet that pens could be used, while Sandwell Council, near Birmingham, told voters they could bring a pen but urged them not to ask staff for one.

East Northamptonshire Council later clarified its initial post, telling people to "feel free to use a pen but make sure it doesn't smudge when folding so it is clear how you have voted".

Sussex Police spokesman said: "Police were called to Durnford Close, Chichester, at around 12.25pm on Thursday June 23 by a volunteer reporting a disturbance outside a polling station.

"A PCSO who was in the area went to the scene and spoke with a woman who was handing out pens."

No offences were committed and it was not being treated as a police matter, the spokesman added.

GETTY

SWNS

TURNOUT

Millions of Britons are heading to the polls today as the nation decides whether to stay in or leave the European Union.

Experts have predicted the decision could see the largest turnout of UK voters in decades, with 46million people eligible to cast their ballot.

Polls opened across the country at 7am and will remain open until 10pm as the nation answers the most important question for a generation.

Experienced poll station clerks are recording record turnouts in parts of the UK, including Scotland and Bristol, whose results will be counted last. 

An estimated 46,499,537 people are entitled to take part in today's vote - a record number for a UK election and there have been reports of queues outside polling stations across the country. It is only the third nationwide referendum in British history. 

But dozens of voters were turned away following a registration error in Leighton Buzzard. 

PA

MANCHESTER WAITS TO ANNOUNCE NATIONAL RESULT

Express.co.uk reporter Alix Culbertson is in Manchester, where the final result of the referendum will be announced tomorrow morning.

She said: “The sun in shining in Manchester but the mood is palpable at the 139-year-old town hall where the official count is taking place.

“A majestic, Victorian Neo-gothic building, it is the perfect setting for the most important decision in most British people's lifetimes.

“Journalists and broadcasters are gathering in the main hall with a dramatic organ as the backdrop as they wait for the results to come after polling closes at 10pm today.

“The first results are expected to come in from Derry/Londonderry at 12.30am and the last from Cheshire at 7am.”

PA

STORMS BATTER SOUTH-EAST

As London and the south east was battered by heavy rainfall a number of polling stations were closed.

Five polling stations opened late in east London as staff were unable get to get there on time as the capital's transport network struggled to cope with the downpour. 

The Electoral Commission said voters delayed by the weather would still be able to vote as long as they were in line by 10pm. 

Some voters have been prevented from voting due to the weather. 

Jodie Rose, from east London, said her garden was flooded with sewage water and that flooding in her road following the heavy rain would deter voters.

PA/ TWITTER KELLY MOLLOY

GETTY

She said: "My nan is 89 years of age and she's already said that she won't be going out to vote."

She said the water was knee-deep around her grandmother's house and that the 89-year-old would not take the "risk" of heading out to a polling station.

The wet weather is set to continue throughout the afternoon and evening, with more flooding expected in parts of the country.

Four flood warnings are in place in south-east England, with 31 flood alerts also issued by the Met Office.

Thunderstorms will also take place during the evening rush hour, following an electric night yesterday. 

PA

ATTN: This image is a SCAM that has been set up by the 'IN' campaign. You need to #Voteleave today pic.twitter.com/Kq14R1rT2D

BREXIT 'SCAM'

The Vote Leave campaign has warned of an 'scam' photo being shared on social media, which attempts to trick voters wishing to vote for Britain to leave the EU into missing the deadline. 

The fraudulous message reads: "Due to the unusually high number of people expected to vote in the Referendum, voting will now take place over two days,” the fake message read.

“The Remain voters will be able to vote on Thursday 23rd June, while the Leave voters will be able to vote on Friday 24th June.

“This will make it much easier to count the votes and also give the Leave campaign the advantage of knowing how many votes are required to win.”



GETTY

REUTERS

TRAVEL CHAOS

British citizens trapped in France by transport strikes will not be allowed an emergency proxy vote, the Electoral Commission has confirmed. 

More than 100 flights, including those operated by British Airways, easyJet and Ryanair, have been disrupted. 

The commission confirmed voters can only apply for an emergency proxy due to a medical issue or if their employment has taken them away after the deadline for the regular proxy vote of June 15. 

Transport issues within Britain are also causing issues for would-be voters, with flooding in London bringing several stations to a standstill. 

Bank and Monument are experiencing mechanical issues, while Waterloo is packed with commuters due to a number of cancelled trains. 

With time running out to vote, a number of commuters have expressed their frustration at possibly not making it to their polling office in time. 

One Waterloo commuter said she was "stuck at Waterloo, watching the crowds, destined to rue my missed vote for evermore/"

Another said: "Can't vote if we are all stuck at Waterloo station, this may cause an issue!"

GETTY

GETTY

LEADING CAMPAIGNERS CAST THEIR VOTES

David Cameron was the first campaign leader to cast his vote. 

The Prime Minister said "good morning" to the gathered media from across the world, as he and his wife Samantha cast their votes at Methodist Hall in Westminster.

Speaking outside his Kent home, Leave campaigner Nigel Farage said: "Actually I do think we are in with a very strong chance, I do genuinely."

"It's all about turnout and those soft remainers staying at home."

As he arrived to cast his vote at a primary school in Biggin Hill near his home in north Kent, Mr Farage said: "I do think that the people who have decided to vote Leave have a real conviction and passion.

"Frankly, I would have walked up here and crawled over broken glass to go and cast my vote.

"I first got involved in this in 1991, Ukip was formed in 1993 and we've all been trying to push this message that there is something wrong with our relationship with the EU, and that we have to have a referendum to change it."

PA

Pacific Press/REX/Shutterstock

REUTERS

REUTERS

GETTY

GETTY

Nicola Sturgeon, the First Minister of Scotland, cast her vote in Glasgow.

There have been reports of low turnout in Edinburgh but Ms Sturgeon said she was hopeful of a large turnout in Scotland. 

Scottish Government officials have been working on contingency plans for what could happen if the overall result is to leave the EU.

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn arrived in a positive mood to cast his vote at Pakeman Primary School in his Islington constituency in north London.

Asked if he was feeling confident, Mr Corbyn smiled and said: "Extremely, it's a very good day."

Michael Gove said he was feeling "quite excited" as he accompanied his wife, Sarah Vine, to St Francis Community Church polling station in North Kensington.

The pair arrived a little before 10am, when Mrs Vine cast her vote. The Justice Secretary had already voted by post.

PA/ TWITTER @EUGENEREGIS

SWNS

BRUSSELS PREPARES FOR BREXIT

As voters head to the polls European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker has made contact with several EU leaders, including with Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi last night and German Chancellor Angela Merkel “moments ago,” 

Margaritis Schinas, the Commission spokesman, confirmed Juncker will speak to French President François Hollande tomorrow. 

The Commission is not expected to make any statement today, although it's believed Brussels has prepared a one line statement in the event of Brexit. 

Mr Schinas said: “The only one to speak is the British people."

GETTY

AFP GETTY

A photo of the European Commission removing one of its 28 flags from outside its Brussels HQ prompted speculation the incident was related to the referendum. 

A Brussels official quickly denied the claim and said the flag was removed due to damage. 

Voters in London and south-east England were seen wading through floodwater and were forced to brave torrential downpours to cast their ballots.

The capital is expected to see a month's rainfall in the space of a few hours and a red Met Office weather warning is in place for parts of the country.

There were reports of flooded streets after overnight thunderstorms swept through, threatening disruption as voters head to polling stations.

Kingston upon Thames Council in south west London has moved two polling stations after they were inundated with water.

Polling stations in Devon Way in Chessington and Shiraz Mirza in New Malden have been relocated, while several others remain difficult to access because of the wet weather.

GETTY

REUTERS

REUTERS

Out of 3,754 polling stations in the capital, five opened late because of the weather, a spokeswoman for London Councils said.

In Newham, east London, two stations opened slightly later due to issues with staff travel and flooding, and a station in Tower Hamlets, east London, and  one in Redbridge, north-east London, were also affected.

A burst water main also shut a polling station in Barking. 

A spokeswoman for London Councils said: "The polling stations will not be staying open any later but what we advise people to do, given the weather, is make sure you are there by 10pm at the latest and if you are there at 10pm and you are still in line, you will be able to vote." 

Despite the downpour voters turned out in force to cast their ballot and were seen wading through floodwater outside polling stations in the south east. 

Long queues snaked outside polling stations and voters patiently waited in line outside churches, schools and shopping centres to have their say on whether Britain should stay in the EU.

This is the pavement that takes you to our polling station.............. #EURef ?????????????? pic.twitter.com/b9hEHmKQnu

Madness. Flooded route to polling station. pic.twitter.com/GCS2x3hLca

Heavy rainfall overnight has lead to us having to move a polling station in Chessington pic.twitter.com/1n6AJhE0fw

Mauro Murgia, who lives opposite a polling station in West Hampstead, said: "I took a picture of the queue at around 8.30am and it was the longest queue to a polling station I have ever seen.

"I was surprised because for the London mayoral election there was hardly anyone, I was in and out in three seconds.

"There were around 30 people queuing up outside, luckily the rain had stopped. They were waiting quite patiently."

Olly Wainwright wrote on Twitter: "Longest queues I've seen at the Hackney polling station already."

Nigel Wilkinson tweeted: "Queues at the polling station. Reports of 20-plus minutes in some places. Going to be a big turnout."

Lucy Davidson wrote: "Queues at the polling station. Never seen it so busy. If you live in the UK - take your umbrella and go vote!"

Dozens of voters were turned away in Leighton Buzzard, Bedfordshire after not being included on the registration list. 

REUTERS

PA

REUTERS

Angry locals hassled MPs outside Linslade polling station for the "total shambles", and Central Bedfordshire Council eventually made arrangements for voters who'd missed out.

Referendum day and polling stations are trending on Twitter as voters take to social media to discuss the referendum.

The hashtag #dogsatpollingstations is also trending as dog owners go out and cast their vote. 

The EU referendum was the talk of the Glastonbury Festival as voting began.

Several festival-goers could be seen wearing 'I'm In' badges to support the Remain campaign, which counts Glastonbury founder Michael Eavis as an outspoken supporter.

A large proportion of the 180,000 campers expected over the weekend arrived at the site on Wednesday and Mr Eavis repeatedly urged them to arrange a postal or proxy vote as Worthy Farm has no polling station.

GETTY

PA

Donald Trump is expected to arrive in the UK this morning to open a multimillion pound golf resort in Ayrshire, Scotland. 

The presumptive Republican presidential nominee has previously said he would be "inclined to leave the EU". 

BANKS GEAR UP FOR RESULT

Britain's biggest banks are drafting in staff to work through the night as they gear up for the EU referendum result.

Barclays, Lloyds Banking Group and US giants such as JP Morgan Chase and Citi are among those calling in senior traders and workers after voting closes at 10pm.

City experts are forecasting market traders could stay chained to their desks over the weekend if Britain votes for Brexit. 

A last-minute surge to register to vote crashed the Government's website hours before the deadline on June 7, prompting a 48-hour extension.

When the polls close at 10pm, sealed ballot boxes will be moved across the country to the 382 local counting areas.

Individual areas' results will be declared throughout the night. 

Polls opened in Gibraltar at 6am and will close at 9pm. 

GEOFF ROBINSON

GEOFF ROBINSON

Queues begin to form at Central Hall polling station this morning. pic.twitter.com/flP8CYsC3t

If you are unable to vote due to a medical emergency that means you cannot go to the polling station in person today, you can apply to vote by emergency proxy.

You can also apply to vote by emergency proxy if your job means =you cannot go to the polling station in person, and you only became aware of that fact after the proxy vote deadline on June 15.

You can apply for an emergency proxy vote up until 5pm today.

You must be registered in England, Scotland or Wales and eligible to vote in the EU Referendum to apply for an emergency proxy vote.

The final national result will be officially declared by the Chief Counting Officer at Manchester Town Hall. 

The Electoral Commission estimates the final result will be announced at around breakfast time on Friday morning. 

It's expected Newcastle and Sunderland will be the first areas to deliver their results. 

PA

REUTERS

A variety of unusual venues have been turned into polling stations including caravans and football clubs.

Villagers in Carlton, Cambridgeshire, have been voting in a tiny caravan parked outside the Old Rectory.

The small caravan pulled-up outside Robin Wylie's house last night and around 100 people are expected to vote there today.

Mr Wylie said: "There are only around 140 people in the village. The caravan arrived outside my house last night and I provide the electricity for it."

There was also a steady stream of people voting in a caravan in the car park of Tesco supermarket in Fulbourn in Cambridgeshire.

GETTY

TWITTER/ THOMAS GORTON

Other unusual polling stations include pub The George Inn in Babraham, Cambs, Newmarket Football Club, the George and Dragon pub in Snailwell, Cambs and Soham Town Rangers Football Club.

After pledging to give Britons an In/Out referendum during his 2015 general election manifesto, David Cameron announced in February that the vote would take place on 23 June.

The Prime Minister himself has been one of the most prominent campaigners for the Remain camp, along with Chancellor George Osborne, London Major Sadiq Khan and Labour Leader Jeremy Corbyn.

Those to have taken up the baton for the Leave camp include former Mayor of London Boris Johnson, Justice Secretary Michael Gove, former Conservative leader Iain Duncan Smith and Ukip leader Nigel Farage.

On the final day of campaigning, Mr Cameron said: “This is not the Britain I know, this is not the Britain I love. The Britain I know is better than the Britain of these debates, of insults, of posters.

EXPRESS

GETTY

GETTY

“The Britain I know is a Britain of Jo Cox. The Britain‎ where people are tolerant and not prejudiced and where people hate.”

Also speaking on Wednesday, Mr Johnson made his final speech at a rally in North Yorkshire.

He said: “This will not come again. Vote Leave tomorrow, take back control of our country and our democracy and stick up for hundreds of millions of people around Europe who agree with us, who agree that the EU is going in the wrong direction.”

The vote today marks the second referendum for Scots in as many years.

In 2014 voters north of the border opted by 55% to 45% to remain part of the UK after a referendum on independence.

But First Minister Nicola Sturgeon has repeatedly warned that result could be revisited if Scotland is "dragged" out of Europe against its wishes, if the UK as a whole opts for Brexit.



The EU started out life as the European Coal and Steel Community and by 1973, when Britain joined, it had morphed into the European Economic Community (EEC).

Two years later, on 5 June 1975, Britain held its first European referendum, when voters decided whether to remain in the EEC, otherwise known as the single market.

Almost 26million Britons voted in what turned out to be a 67 per cent to 37 per cent victory for the Remain team.

But the question of Britain’s involvement in Europe has continued to be a prominent issue ever since.

In 1993, the Maastricht Treaty led to the creation of the European Union, which marked a change from the EEC.

Whereas its precursor had been an economic organisation, the EU described itself as both economic and political.

