Over-50s overwhelmingly in favour of Brexit –and 77 per cent believe it will see end of EU

2016-06-21

GETTY

A new survey has revealed 66 per cent of those aged 50 and older will vote to leave the European Union in Thursday's referendum. 

And 77 per cent believe if the country leaves the European Union other countries will follow, suggesting a possible end to the EU. 

GETTY

Many believe the politicians backing the Remain campaign lack influence compared to those supporting Brexit. 

Only 9 per cent think the Prime Minister David Cameron, who has been heading the Remain campaign, has been influential and 4 per cent say the same for Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn. 

However politicians backing the Brexit campaign seem to be more appealing to older votes. 

A third (31 per cent) say Nigel Farage, UKIP leader and Leave campaigner, is the most influential politician in the debate followed by Brexit leader Michael Gove (28 per cent). 

The poll by lifestyle website Silversurfers.com found 89 per cent of over 50s think politicians are more interested in their careers than the actual outcome. Distrust in both campaigns seems to be a common theme. 

GETTY

A third of people say they have lost interest in either side of the argument for and against the European referendum due to a lack of convincing information. 

Two in five people don't believe anything the Remain campaign says while almost half that amount feel that the leave campaign is not to be believed. 

Motivations behind voting to leave the EU seem to focus on immigration and national security. 

Of those asked, 68 per cent will be voting to leave due to immigration controls with 66 per cent citing interference from Brussels as the main reason for their leave vote. 

National security and terrorism (65 per cent) was also behind people's motivation to leave as was the impact on the NHS by 59 per cent of over 50s. 

Two thirds believe the country's borders will be safer if we vote to leave the EU and the same amount think a leave vote will be better for young people. 

The over 50s are an important voting demographic. 

The age group make up almost half of the voting population and 98 per cent of them say they will turn out to vote, making their decision to vote Leave significant. 

Martin Lock, CEO of Silversurfers said: "Since our last survey in April the over 50s are still strong in their belief that leaving the EU is the right decision for the country. 

"But the message from the survey is clear – both sides of the debate come across as lacking in credibility. 

GETTY

"This means people are making decisions based on their own knowledge. 

"It is interesting to see that the over 50s believe young people will be better off if we leave the EU. It suggests the age group is thinking about the future and how to make the country better for the next generation. 

"The over 50s are the group that consistently turn out to vote so this is a very serious indication of what we might expect this week."

