It's 'nonsense' Britain is not independent: Desperate Cameron dismisses Brexit claims

2016-06-22

Getty

The Prime Minister called on voters to think of their children and grandchildren when going to the ballot box on Thursday for the EU Referendum.

He said if we voted to leave the bloc jobs would have "less revenue" and there would be less cash to build hospitals and schools we need.

The Tory leader urged those on the fence to listen to the businesses and economists warning of the dire consequences of Brexit.

 This is an irreversible decision, once you jump out of the airplane you can't scramble back into the cockpit hatch

David Cameron

He told BBC Breakfast: "We should all listen to the thousands of businesses, the nine out of 10 economists, the governor of the Bank of England, the OECD, the IMF, independent organisations, that are warning of the economic consequences, that Britain is a great country, we have a great economy but we'll be better off, more jobs, more livelihoods if we stay."

Warning about the repercussions of voting for Brexit, he added: "This is an irreversible decision, once you jump out of the airplane you can't scramble back into the cockpit hatch.

"I can see after six years of this job that Britain is stronger, Britain is greater when we work through these institutions, like NATO, like the European Union, to fix the things that we need to fix.

Getty

"If I could sum this all up in one word it would be 'together'.

"Together we can build a stronger economy, together we can have more jobs, together we can meet challenges whether its climate change or other problems we face in this world.

"Britain is a great country but we've always been a country which makes our voice heard and gets things done by working with other organisations.

"We don't quit, we make them work for us."

The Prime Minister hit out at the Leave campaign, saying they showed during last night's BBC debate leaving the EU "doesn't solve the challenge of immigration" but would "be a massive challenge for our economy".

He said the reforms he managed to secure in Brussels earlier this year means the immigration challenge can be tackled, but voting to leave means we will not gain those "advantages".

BBC

Getty

The Remain campaigner said: "If we stay in the EU then coming down the track are these vital changes saying you have to come here, you have to work for four years before you get full access to welfare.

"We're ending getting something for nothing.

"If we vote to leave we don't get those changes and so we don't get those advantages.



"It's really important to focus on what really matters in this referendum.

"There are good ways to control immigration but leaving the EU, leaving the single market, damaging our economy, as all these businesses are saying today, must be the wrong answer."

He attacked the Leave camp for claiming the country will only be independent if we vote for Brexit, saying the idea Britain is not independent is "nonsense" as the fact we are having a referendum "demonstrates our sovereignty".

As a parting plea before tomorrow's vote, he added: "I would say to the British people, let's not make a decision that could really damage our economy and the livelihoods of families in this country on the basis of claims that have turned out not to be the case.

"We will be safer, we will be stronger as a country, we'll be better off as a country and that will mean more jobs and opportunities for young people and future generations and a stronger country if we vote to remain in the EU.

"I'm not saying the EU is perfect, it needs reform, we are bringing reform but let's not make this choice to cut ourselves off from the world, to damage our economy.

"And let's recognise that the big challenges that we face, whether growing economies, getting more jobs, tackling huge problems in our world, we're better off if we fight them together."

