Mark Carney: Bank of England ready with £250BILLION to keep stability amid Brexit vote

2016-06-24

GETTY

The Bank chief stressed that policymakers stood ready to inject billions of pounds worth of cash into markets to prop up Britain's financial system, with measures similar to those seen at the height of the financial crisis.

Dr Carney also said Britain's banks were robust and had been subject to rigorous stress tests to deal with huge volatility.

Speaking this morning, the Governor said: "Inevitably, there will be a period of uncertainty and adjustment following this result.

"But we are well prepared for this.

"The Treasury and the Bank of England have engaged in extensive contingency planning and the Chancellor and I have been in close contact, including through the night and this morning."

It's hoped the comments will help calm financial markets, which have been sent into freefall by the historic result.

It comes as the pound plunged to its lowest level since 1985 overnight falling 10 per cent against the dollar.

And the FTSE 100 dived by more than nine per cent as it opened this morning.

Dr Carney said: "The Bank will not hesitate to take additional measures as required as markets adjust and the UK economy moves forward.

"These adjustments will be supported by a resilient UK financial system – one that the Bank of England has consistently strengthened over the last seven years.

"The capital requirements of our largest banks are now ten times higher than before the crisis."

The Governor added: "This substantial capital and huge liquidity gives banks the flexibility they need to continue to lend to UK businesses and households, even during challenging times.

"Moreover, as a backstop, and to support the functioning of markets, the Bank of England stands ready to provide more than £250bn of additional funds through its normal facilities.

"The Bank of England is also able to provide substantial liquidity in foreign currency, if required."

The Bank said it has also been working with policymakers and other overseas central banks to make plans for the leave outcome.

The financial regulator the Financial Conduct Authority also released a statement designed to restore calm this morning. The watchdog said the vote had "significant implications for the UK' and added that it was in "very close contact" with the firms it supervises, as well as the Treasury, the Bank of England and other UK authorities.

The regulator said it would continue to monitor developments in the financial markets.

GETTY

Earlier this morning the Bank said in a statement: "The Bank of England is monitoring developments closely.

"It has undertaken extensive contingency planning and is working closely with HM Treasury, other domestic authorities and overseas central banks.

"The Bank of England will take all necessary steps to meet its responsibilities for monetary and financial stability."

Shadow chancellor John McDonnell said the Bank of England may have to intervene to shore up the pound.

Some economists have now downgraded their forecasts for UK growth and have forecast a recession unless a quick deal with the EU can be made.

