EU referendum result: What happens if it is a dead heat or 50/50?

2016-06-23

Getty

The Leave and Remain camps are neck and neck in the polls as the people of Britain cast their votes in the EU referendum today. 

But what happens if there is a draw? Here is a look at what could happen if the EU referendum result turns out to be a dead heat. 

An Electoral Commission spokesman said that the EU vote was an “advisory” referendum, as opposed to a “binary” referendum which has a fixed outcome.  

Therefore, he said: “If there was a dead heat, it would be for Parliament to consider what the next step would be.” 

But the spokesman confirmed that a dead heat could only occur if there were “exactly the same number of votes” on each side - something which is extremely unlikely. 





After a general election, political parties can form coalitions if there is a hung Parliament. But there are no plans for what would happen in the event of draw in the EU referendum. 

A government spokesperson told ITV News: “It is vanishingly unlikely that there would be tie, with exactly equal numbers of votes cast for each outcome, and there is no specific provision for one under the European Union Referendum Act 2015 or the Political Parties, Elections and Referendum Act 2000.”

On the night of the referendum count, Brexit and Remain campaigners can request recounts at a local count venues if results look set to be very close. 

But the Electoral Commission spokesman said: “There is no provision for a national recount. It will not happen at a national level.” 

Prime Minster David Cameron has said that a second referendum is not on the cards, even if the result turns out to be very close.  

Mr Cameron said: “I’m absolutely clear, a referendum is a referendum. It is a once in a generation, once in a lifetime opportunity and the result determines the outcome.

“If we vote to stay, we stay and that’s it. And if we vote to leave, we leave, and that’s it.”



PA

But Brexit campaigner and Ukip leader Nigel Farage has suggested that he would fight for a second referendum if the Remain camp wins by just a narrow margin. 

He told the Mirror: ”In a 52-48 referendum this would be unfinished business by a long way. If the Remain campaign win two-thirds to one-third that ends it."

HOW IMPORTANT IS TURNOUT? 

