'Brexit will NOT solve immigration' Clegg tells voters not to be 'fooled' into leaving EU

2016-06-22

On the eve of the European Union referendum, the former deputy prime minister and Lib Dem leader warned voters not to be "fooled or seduced" into leaving the EU.

He said voters had every right to be angry but a vote for Brexit would not end mass immigration. 

The passionate attempt to convince Brexit voters came during his hour-long Q&A show on LBC.

LBC; GETTY

 The mass movement of people across borders, across huge distances whether we like it or not, is a big difficult reality

Nick Clegg

He said: "The idea that putting a cross next to the Brexit option tomorrow and suddenly all of that is going to be solved, why then have the Australians not done it? Or the Americans? Or the Canadians? Or the Norwegians? Or the Icelanders? Or the Swiss?

"No other country has because the mass movement of people across borders, across huge distances whether we like it or not, is a big difficult reality that we can't just wish away by turning our back on our European neighbours.

"If you want to vote Brexit then go ahead, but please don't imagine though that you're going to wake up on Friday and find Farage, Gove and Johnson with a solution to your concerns.

"They themselves don't have a solution."



The MP for Sheffield Hallam, who resigned as leader of the Liberal Democrats after last year's general election election, has been a long-time supporter of the 28-member bloc.

Mr Clegg insisted that "every single country Leave campaigners are advocating – without exception – have higher levels of immigration than we do".

He explained that immigration from outside the EU – which amounts to more than inside the EU – is a sovereign decision by the government, not the EU. 

The Sheffield MP continued: "They can't even agree amongst themselves for example whether they want to implement a new land border in Ireland.



"If you don't implement a new land border, which Theresa Villiers, a prominent Leave campaigner and Secretary of State for Northern Ireland advocates, then what's the point?

"How are you controlling borders if you're leaving the back door wide open into the rest of the European Union?

With less than 24 hours before the polls open, he told one caller: "You feel really angry about this, but please don't be fooled or seduced into thinking they have an answer because they don't have an answer they can agree upon themselves.

"They don't have a plan".

