Battle of the Thames: Is this what Bob Geldof thinks of British fishermen's EU protest?

2016-06-16

GETTY - PA

Mr Farage led a fleet of Brexit-supporting fishermen through Tower Bridge, in a colourful stunt that drew crowds to the riverside. 

But Geldof and an assortment of Remain activists in dinghys and hired craft and joined the flotilla. 

Boomtown Rats music blared from a deafening speaker system as Geldof taunted Brexit campaigners, infuriating onlookers and Mr Farage. 

REUTERS

The Ukip leader said the singer's actions were "just disgusting".

He added: "These are communities that have been devastated. These are communities that no-one has listened to for years.

"They are here today, they have taken – some of them – several days out of their working week to come and make their protest, to say 'Look, we want to take back control of our seas, we want to get jobs back in this industry'.

"To see multimillionaires frankly mocking them is a pretty shameful sight."

REUTERS

Ukip MEP Mike Hooken also took issue with Geldof's actions - which he found especially hurtful given his family's own tragic fishing history. 

Mr Hookem's brother Keith died in 1968 at the age of just 17, when the Ross Cleveland trawler capsized and sunk off the coast of Iceland. 

He told Express.co.uk: "It was one of the worst fishing tragedies that has ever happened. 

"And then to sit here and listen to that prat playing music trying to drown out the fisherman and tell them they've never had it so good... it's unbelievable. He's an absolute tosspot."

Mr Hookem also challenged Geldof to a Brexit debate.

He said: "Face to face, whenever he wants it. The man talks rubbish."

REUTERS

Geldof used a loudspeaker to shout abuse at Farage, who turned his back on the singer. 

Geldof shouted: "You are no fisherman's friend. You are a fraud, Nigel. Go back down the river because you are up one without a canoe or a paddle.

"Stop lying. This election is too important."





REUTERS

He later added in a statement: "The In Crowd are here to say to Farage's fishy flotilla: 'Don't sink Britain'.

"Farage had the chance to help fisherman in the EU, but only attended one out of 43 fisheries committee meetings.

"The UK gets the second biggest quota out of member states and has the biggest profit of any EU member state. Leaving Europe would be disastrous for our country, our economy, our public services and our fishing industry."





We used to protest against the establishment. Now the establishment protests against us. We must be doing something right. #Brexit

Around 30 boats decked out in colourful flags and banners took part in a pro-Leave flotilla today, while other fisherman supported from the banks of the river. 

Robert Bull was one of those to make the trip only to be insulted by Geldof. 

He said: "My boy is on one of those boats, he's a fisherman too. We all came up today with our flags and banners to show our support.

"There are much for boats for Leave so far, there aren't many at all for Remain. 

"We're all for Brexit, the fisherman are all against Europe, for the quotas at least."

The UK possesses 13 per cent of the EU's sea area and is allocated 30 per cent of the current fish quotas.

