Mark Carney accused of 'peddling phoney forecasts' on behalf of Remain camp

2016-06-16

GETTY

Senior minister Andrea Leadsom said Mark Carney's intervention was “dangerous" and his prediction deliberately gave a worst case scenario after the Bank of England claimed the pound would crash with a Brexit vote.

The Governor was also condemned by the Tory chairman of the Public Administration Committee Bernard Jenkin for going "way beyond what a bank governor would normally do in terms of making statements about rate setting and economic forecasts". 

And two former Tory leaders and former Chancellors accused Mr Carney and George Osborne of “peddling phoney forecasts".



Mr Jenkin, who is a director Vote Leave, also accused Mr Carney of acting aggressively to criticism of his alleged abuse of power. 

He said: "He's reacted very, very aggressive towards me. 

"He's trying to make a distinction that the Bank of England does not run on public funds, even though it's a publicly owned corporation. 

"The advice I have from the Speaker's Counsel is that there appears to be no exemption for the Bank of England." 



GETTY

Today the Bank waded again into the debate with a dire warning that the pound would “plunge" in value if there is a Brexit vote. 

 He's reacted very, very aggressive towards me

Bernard Jenkin

The Bank added that the result of 23 June 23 poll remained the "largest immediate risk" facing financial markets, not just in the UK, but worldwide. 

Earlier Mr Carney has insisted his economic warnings were independent of politics and the MP has made "numerous and substantial" misconceptions. 

However, his intervention followed scaremongering by the Chancellor George Osborne that there would have to be an emergency budget with £30 billion of cuts as he ratcheted up the Remain's Project Fear campaign. 

The Express revealed a secret plan by Mr Osborne to panic the markets to try to stop a Brexit vote. 

GETTY



Four senior Conservatives, including two former chancellors, have attacked the Treasury and the Bank of England for "peddling phoney forecasts" in a bid to scare voters into choosing to remain in the EU. 

Former chancellors Lord Norman Lamont and Lord Nigel Lawson and ex-party leaders Iain Duncan Smith and Lord Michael Howard poured scorn on warnings of economic disaster from the Remain campaign. 

The four also hit out at pro-Remain Tories for their behaviour in the referendum debate, describing Chancellor George Osborne's threat of an emergency Budget in the event of Brexit as "ludicrous scaremongering born of desperation". 

GETTY

But an increasingly desperate Prime Minister David Cameron who has seen his Project Fear campaign fail, claimed that it was "deeply concerning" that senior Conservatives have criticised the "independent" Bank of England. 

Mr Cameron tweeted: "It's deeply concerning that the Leave campaign is criticising the independent Bank of England. 

"We should listen to experts when they warn us of the dangers to our economy of leaving the European Union." 

