Cameron attacked for leaving the NHS in ruin following 'flood' of EU migrants

2016-06-20

David Cameron admitted it is "very challenging" to control immigration from inside the EU after he was accused of failing Britain’s hospitals and schools from a "flood" of migrants.

During a special Question Time event, ahead of this week's EU referendum, one audience member challenged the Prime Minister for leaving the NHS "under tremendous strain".

Mr Cameron, whose Conservative manifesto pledged to cut net migration to the "tens of thousands", was challenged by the audience for not fulfilling his pledge.

The young woman claimed "everything is going to get flooded" by EU migrants if Britain votes to remain this Thursday.

BREXIT: WHAT WOULD HAPPEN TO THE NHS?

BBC

She said: "I think that it's an only logical thing to understand that if we have absolutely no limitations on immigration from the EU that people are obviously going to immigrate over here.

"We've got our public sector, we've got NHS that's under tremendous strain at the moment – you're not doing anything to invest any kind of thing into them to make them any stronger or better.

"You know full well that if we don't put a limit on this immigration - and the only way to do that is to leave the single market - then everything is just going to get flooded.

"You're not doing anything to counterbalance all the immigration coming into these services."

The Prime Minister insisted the only way of propping up the NHS was to have a strong economy, which he claimed was dependent on Britain remaining in the EU.

Mr Cameron said: "What I'd say is, let's take the health service. What I'd say is that we are putting more money into the NHS. 

"Now we can argue we should put even more in. Let's work how to get the growth in our economy into the NHS.

"But when you listen to the people in the NHS – the Royal College of Midwives, the Royal College of Physicians, Simon Stephens who runs the NHS, the trade unions who work in the NHS – they all want us to remain in a reformed European Union because they think that's better for the NHS because a bigger economy, a better economy, a stronger economy is always better for our NHS."

BBC

 You know full well that if we don't put a limit on this immigration then everything will get flooded

Question Time audience member

However, the heated row over immigration escalated when he was interrupted by the audience member.

She said: "But you keep saying this reformed European Union that we are part of. You've negotiated some changes that you say 'oh it's going to make a massive difference to the immigration'.

"But realistically it's not, it's not going to make a massive difference to the levels of immigration, especially considering we have other countries that are about to join the European Union."

BBC

Mr Cameron struggled to respond over how Britain could take back control of it's borders by insisting there was "no silver bullet" on immigration.

He said: "Is it really worth leaving the single market damaging our economy to make progress with this issue? There is no simple way."

The Prime Minister added that immigration would fall as the economies European nations recover. 

He explained: "I think we have had an extraordinary period where we have created more jobs than the rest of the EU put together. That is now changing."

During the Question Time, Mr Cameron also refused to say whether he would veto Turkey joining the EU.

He was even compared to Neville Chamberlain for appeasing other EU leaders during his renegotiation bid. 

EU REFERENDUM: WHEN ARE TV DEBATES?

