Cameron now finds himself joining the ranks of Tory PMs brought down by Europe

2016-06-24

GETTY

"This approach is stuck in the past, I want to talk about the future," David Cameron told Tony Blair. "He was the future once!"

Just over a decade and half after since that audacious first jab at Prime Minister's Questions, David Cameron has found that he, too, was the future once.

He now joins the ranks of Tory prime ministers brought down by the poisonous issue of Europe.

Mr Cameron will leave office just a few days short of his 50th birthday this October. He will become Britain's youngest ex-prime minister since the Earl of Roseberry stood down in 1894. His term in Number 10 is likely to be rather better remembered however.

 He was the future once!

David Cameron

In 11 years at the helm of his party, Mr Cameron has both charmed and infuriated the Tory faithful.

And while there have been disappointments, he leaves office with a solid record of achievements that are likely to be well regarded by political historians.

His boldness in forming a coalition with Nick Clegg and the Lib Dems provided the country with five years of stable government that was urgently needed to address the disastrous economic mess inherited from Gordon Brown.

The Lib-Con administration may have been unloved by many in either party yet pushed through substantial reforms.

Are premier, he has run orderly Cabinets with senior ministers given long spells to concentrate on reforming their Whitehall departments in contrast to the chaos and gimmickry of the Labour predecessors.

He steered an often reluctant party towards a compassionate "One Nation" Toryism modelled on the creed of his hero Harold Macmillan and tried to bring some optimism to the Tory brand with his pledge to "let sunshine win the day".

GETTY

It may have been loathed by the hard-line Thatcherites yet under his leadership the Tories won their first majority election victory for 23 years.

And Mr Cameron has certainly been a peerless master of the Commons ever since that cheeky first ambush on Tony Blair. His good humour mixed with a glint of steel - and an occasional flash of temper - have always been compelling viewing from the Commons gallery. At the dispatch box, he will be a tough act for his successor to follow.

Aides who work alongside him speak of an astonishing capacity for hard work and ability to remain cool in the face of the torturous complexities of modern government but able to switch off and recharge with a little "chillaxing" when necessary.

In private, he is affable and humorous with a gift for telling smutty jokes.

GETTY

Who will be the next Prime Minister?

His departure that means his time in Downing Street will be a year shorter than the seven years managed by the luckless John Major.

But Mr Cameron has been the dominant figure in British politics in the way that Major never was.

Thursday's cry of freedom from the electorate has cruelly brought the Cameron era in Downing Street to an unexpectedly abrupt end.

The easy charm, lightening quick mind and ability to improvise his way out of a crisis were not enough to get him through the biggest gamble of his political career.

While it destroyed him politically, Mr Cameron will go down in history as the first Prime Minister since Harold Wilson to have the courage to give Britain a say on the country's relationship with Europe.

GETTY

He may have been forced into holding the referendum by the intense pressure, not least from the crusade for a UK exit from Brussels led by the Daily Express, and he ultimately ended up on the wrong side.

Yet the decision to trigger that national poll will transform this country's destiny.

Mr Cameron delivered his resignation statement today with characteristic humility and dignity.

For all his smooth public relations skills, he is at heart a dedicated and patriotic public servant determined to do the right thing by his country. He will feel the hurt of defeat keenly.

Westminster stands on the brink of an exciting but uncertain new era with someone else set to become the political future. They may find the job is not as easy as Mr Cameron has made it look.

