Labour MP SHOT DEAD: Jo Cox DIES after being shot three times and stabbed by attacker

2016-06-17

GETTY/PA/TWITTER

Jo Cox, a 41-year-old mother-of-two, was rushed to hospital after a gunman opened fire on her in the town of Birstall, West Yorkshire.

The MP for Batley and Spen, was left lying in a pool of blood on the pavement as the man shot her three times after first assaulting her outside her advice surgery at Birstall Library.

A spokesman for West Yorkshire Police said she was pronounced dead at 1.48pm.

A 52-year-old man, named locally as Tommy Mair, has been arrested and police are currently searching his house. 

A 77-year-old man was also attacked. 

Temporary chief constable West Yorkshire Police Dee Collins said: “Just before 1pm today Jo Cox, MP for Batley and Spen, was attacked in Market Street. 

“I’m now very sad to have to report that she has died as a result of her injuries. 

TWITTER / @Jo_Cox1

“I would like to express our deepest sympathies to her family and friends at this tragic time.

“Jo was attacked by a man who inflicted serious and sadly ultimately fatal injuries. 

“Subsequently there was a further attack on a 77-year-old man nearby who has sustained injuries that are non-life-threatening. 

“Shortly afterwards a man was arrested nearby by local uniformed police officers. Weapons, including a firearm, have also been recovered.

"At 1.48pm Jo Cox was pronounced deceased by a doctor who was working with a paramedic crew that were attending to her serious injuries.

"This is a very significant investigation with large numbers of witnesses that are being spoken to by police at this time.

"A full investigation is under way to establish the motive for this attack.

“As this inquiry is at a very early stage and we have an individual under arrest we are not in a position to discuss a motive at this time. 

“We are not looking for anyone else in connection with this incident at present.” 

SWNS

 He shot her once, then shot her again, then shot her once more

Eyewitness

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn said the country would be "in shock at the horrific murder" of the MP, who was a "much loved colleague".

He said: "Jo died doing her public duty at the heart of our democracy, listening to and representing the people she was elected to serve. It is a profoundly important cause for us all.

"Jo was universally liked at Westminster, not just by her Labour colleagues, but across Parliament.

"In the coming days, there will be questions to answer about how and why she died. But for now all our thoughts are with Jo's husband Brendan and their two young children.

"They will grow up without their mum, but can be immensely proud of what she did, what she achieved and what she stood for.

SCREENSHOT

Neighbours described the suspect as a "loner".

Police have stepped up patrols in the area after eyewitnesses reported hearing three shots and police wrestling a man to the ground. 

One eyewitness said: "He shot her once, then shot her again, then shot her once more."

Another described the scene moments after the shooting. 

Hichem Ben-Abdallah said: "Her face was bleeding, her hair roughed up as if she’s been pulled from her hair.

“The hysteria, everyone was crying. 

“I’m absolutely shocked to be quite honest. I know Jo very well and we did the campaign for Labour councillor last month and absolutely it’s devastating.”

He added the weapon “was probably an old gun, a sawn-off shotgun”. 

Others claimed the MP was dragged by the hair and kicked by the attacker. 



REUTERS

Witnesses claim that an onlooker tackled a man with a gun and wrestled him to the floor, before a gun shot was fired. 

One witness claimed the gunman looked to be in his 60s or 70s. 

Eyewitness Clarke Rothwell, who runs a cafe nearby said: "Three times she was shot, the initial time which then she dropped to the floor, and two more times.

"The third time he got close proximity, he shot her round the head area.

"In the meantime he was stabbing her as well, he was stabbing her with his knife."

Mr Rothwell said there was blood everywhere at the scene.

One witness said: “The whole scene has been taped off. There are armed police everywhere.”

Graeme Howard, 38, who lives nearby said: "He was pinned down by two police officers and she was taken away in an ambulance."

PA

GETTY

Mrs Cox's husband Brendan, a former advisor to ex-Prime Minister Gordon Brown, tweeted a smiling photo of his wife standing by the Thames, where the family live on a house boat. 

The MP protested against the ‘Brexit flotilla’ on the Thames yesterday, and is the co-chair of Friends of Syria. 

The mother-of-two, who was elected in 2015, was a prominent member of the Remain campaign.

Mr Cox urged people to "fight against the hatred that killed her".

He said: "Today is the beginning of a new chapter in our lives. 

“More difficult, more painful, less joyful, less full of love. 

“I and Jo's friends and family are going to work every moment of our lives to love and nurture our kids and to fight against the hate that killed Jo."

The couple's neighbours on the Thames paid tribute to Mrs Cox in a moving nautical tribute. 



NC

GETTY

pic.twitter.com/mPOaytowxN

MPs paid tribute to Mrs Cox and reacted with horror after hearing she had been killed in the attack.

Chancellor George Osborne said: "Incredibly sad to hear shocking news about Jo Cox. All my thoughts with Brendan and their children."

Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond said he was "deeply saddened by news of the death of Jo Cox".

Prime Minister David Cameron said: "The death of Jo Cox is a tragedy. She was a committed and caring MP. My thoughts are with her husband Brendan and her two young children."

Former Scottish First Minister Alex Salmond said: "Absolutely devastating news about Jo Cox. Truly dreadful. One of the brightest and best of the new MPs and a great loss to the country."

The whole of the Labour family, and indeed the whole country, is in shock and grief at the horrific murder of Jo Cox pic.twitter.com/obic5pOCS3

The death of Jo Cox is a tragedy. She was a committed and caring MP. My thoughts are with her husband Brendan and her two young children.

William Hague said: "Terribly sad to hear of the death of Jo Cox, senselessly killed working for her constituents."

Former Cabinet minister Iain Duncan Smith said: "I am shocked and saddened to hear that Jo Cox has died as the result of this brutal attack. My prayers are with her family at this terrible time."

A Buckingham Palace spokesman said the Queen will write privately to Mr Cox.

Daniel Blyth, 38, a company director from Birstall, said: “I saw seven police cars racing up Leeds Road towards Morley. They were unmarked BMWs.

“There are two helicopters flying overhead. 

“It all seems very dramatic. I have heard that two people have been shot but I’m not who are why. It’s all very unusual for Birstall.”

REUTERS

REUTERS

SKY NEWS

Hichem Ben-Abdallah, owner of the nearby Azzuro restaurant, described the scene: “I had customers. I was just serving them drinks, then all of a sudden we heard screaming.

“I saw a river of people rushing down the hill. They were screaming - and pulling something behind a car.

One eyewitness told Sky News: “You could see a lady on the floor and there was a big crowd around her. 

“A couple of people were recording stuff which is not what you do in that situation. 

School children and teachers throw flowers on to the hearse carrying murdered Member of Parliament Jo Cox's as her funeral cortege will passes through Heckmondwike in northern Britain

“It doesn’t normally happen, it’s a quiet town is Birstall.

“People were saying to keep their distance because the man had a gun.

“I’ve never known of a shooting round here to be honest, it’s normally just petty crime.”

Campaigning for the EU referendum by Britain Stronger in Europe and Vote Leave has been suspended as a result of the killing and the Prime Minister has cancelled a campaign visit to Gibraltar.

Police and Crime Commissioner for West Yorkshire Mark Burns-Williamson said he has worked closely with the MP.

Speaking at a police press conference he said: “My thoughts and prayers are with Jo’s family at this time.

“I’m deeply shocked such a talented young woman has been attacked and killed while serving her community.”

My hubby @MrBrendanCox & children taking part in the battle of the #Thames - because we're #StrongerIn #Remain pic.twitter.com/6JNMnQ4Zfg

Terrible news about Jo Cox MP thoughts very much with her & family at this awful time

My thoughts are with my colleague Jo Cox and her family - such awful news

The attack comes six years after Labour MP Stephen Timms was stabbed twice in the stomach at a surgery in retaliation to his vote to enter the Iraq War.

Liberal Democrat peer Nigel Jones was attacked during a constituency surgery in 2000 when he was an MP.

Lord Jones was wounded and his aide, Andrew Pennington, was stabbed to death in a sword attack at the party's office in Cheltenham, Gloucestershire.

Tory whip Gavin Barwell was threatened outside his constituency office in Croydon last week.

He said meeting people in unsecured locations was part of an MP's job.

GETTY

GETTY

PA

Mr Barwell said: "It is an unavoidable part of the job that we meet constituents in lots of unsecured locations - on the streets, fairs, meetings.

"Unless you sort of lock MPs away from the public, which would be a terrible ting for our democracy, you can't remove the threat unfortunately.

"All you can do is take sensible advice and make sure your office is as safe as possible."

Labour MP Andy Burnham said we are "living in scary times". 

Flags across Whitehall have been lowered to half mast as MPs pay tribute to Mrs Cox. 

The MP a Cambridge University graduate, spent a decade working in a variety of roles with aid agency Oxfam, including head of policy, head of humanitarian campaigning based in New York and head of its European office in Brussels.

