FURY: Spanish flag is raised over Gibraltar as Madrid says territory will ALWAYS be theirs

2016-06-21

GETTY

Gibraltar Police confirmed the huge red and yellow banner, which had been installed on the west side of the Upper Rock, had now been removed.

Tensions are running high between Gibraltar and Spain amid a renewed dispute over sovereignty of the small Mediterranean territory, which has been under British control since 1713.

Local journalist Debbie Bartlett wrote on Twitter: "Royal Gibraltar Police have now removed a Spanish flag which had been unfurled on the Rock, which has been British 300+ years."

The stunt follows a declaration by the Spanish government last week that Gibraltar "remains Spanish, whether Brexit wins or loses".

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

Responding to a visit by David Cameron to the Rock, Spanish prime minister Mariano Rajoy said: "The government does not like Mr Cameron travelling to Gibraltar.

"What is being debated is that the United Kingdom remain in the EU or leave the EU and the campaign for that should happen in the United Kingdom and not in Gibraltar."

Genevieve Vinet•Facebook

GETTY

On the subject of a post-Brexit deal, Mr Rajoy added: "A period of negotiation would begin to determine the UK's position in relation to the EU concerning such vital matters as the presence of numerous British nationals living in other European Union countries, since we would have to clarify what rights they would have.

"It will not be an easy process. It would last quite some time, and we would have to work on it jointly with all the other EU countries."

GETTY

Spain's acting Foreign Minister, José Manuel García-Margallo, warned at the weekend that it would be "perfectly possible" for Spain to close the border with Gibraltar if Britain votes to cut ties with Brussels on Thursday.

He also raised the prospect of joint-sovereignty, which has been rejected by Britain and the government of Gibraltar.

Mr García-Margallo said: "Once it is out [of the EU] and it is an external border, you have no type of restriction to establish controls in whatever way you want to.

"I'm not saying that we've thought of doing so.

"What we have said is that we would offer the formula of joint sovereignty."

