Brexit: How the world reacted as Britain votes to leave EU in referendum

2016-06-24

PH/GETTY

Here is a look at how nations across the globe reacted to the groundbreaking result.

GERMANY

‘OUT!’ was the one-word headline on the front of Europe’s biggest selling paper, Bild, this morning as the continent woke up to a new EU. 

The German newspaper, which just last week had begged Britain to stay, has now declared Brexit must lead to a reform of the 28-nation bloc. 

The paper said: “The British referendum must lead to a reform of the European Union!” and went on to list eight things the EU must do to recover. 

 The unimaginable has happened

Spiegel

The German paper said Brussels must now cut back on bureaucracy, EU Commission costs and put an end to the travelling circus that sees the EU Parliament sit in Strasbourg and Brussels. 

Yesterday Bild promised to accept Geoff Hurst’s 1966 World Cup goal if Britain voted to stay in the EU. 

Spiegel magazine, which devoted an entire issue to pleading with Britain to stay, said the result was the “big bang”.

The influential German magazine added: “The unimaginable has happened.” 

FRANCE

Le Figaro said “Across, Europe, Eurosceptics rejoice. Stock markets collapse” and said fear could spread across Europe in a domino effect starting with France and the Netherlands. 

The French paper said: “Does Brexit mark the beginning of the end of the EU as we know it? The organisation of the referendum in the UK constitutes a dangerous precedent in Europe, at a moment when it finds itself confronted on one hand by the migrant crisis and on the other, dealing with the eurozone, which is completely unresolved.” 

As French papers focused on panic spreading across Europe in the wake of the historic vote Le Monde wrote: “Brexit: The entire European project put into question” as La Liberation declared: “UK, torn apart, votes to leave the EU.”

The world reacts to Britain's EU Referendum result

The paper added: “This slap in the face is not difficult to explain: A Europe without soul, without a common project, without a clear stance on the migrant crisis, without an effective plan getting out of depression, no longer brings round opinions.” 

The French press said the vote was a “popular revolt” and said Britons ignored dire economic warnings when choosing to leave the EU. 

La Liberation continued: “No one, outside of the nationalists in every country, can welcome this result with satisfaction.” 

BELGIUM

In Belgium La Libre said the decision to leave has put an “untenable pressure” across Europe. 

The paper led: “It’s official, Britons have voted 51.9% in favour of a ‘bye-bye’ to the EU.” 

PH

Looking to the markets, the Belgian paper said: “European markets heading for a black Friday, the pound plummets and gold goes off the rails.”

Belgian Prime Minister Charles Michel tweeted: “I call for a conclave to reaffirm our commitment in July. We have to define our priorities and set out a new future for Europe.” 

Michel called for an emergency meeting of European leaders after the EU referndum no matter what the result. 

NETHERLANDS

De Telegraph simply said “Brits choose Brexit” and said the result was a “surprise” as a near record 33million people voted. 

Amsterdam’s Metro said “Brexit camp win referendum” and fuelled speculation on David Cameron’s future as Prime Minister. 

Holland is seen as a eurosceptic nation, with anti-EU residents hoping Britain’s exit will pave the way for their own referendum.

PH

PH

AUSTRIA

As the far-right celebrated in Austria, it’s national paper said “Deep black day in the history of Europe”.

Kurier said the vote was a “political earthquake” and quoted German politician Reinhard Bütikofer saying: “June 23 will go down as a deep black day in the history of Europe.” 

ITALY

The Italian papers quoted Nigel Farage saying “It’s a victory for ordinary people”. 

La Stampa said there is a “profound risk” that the anti-Brussels sentiment will spread across the continent. 

La Repubblica led with “Great Britain to leave the EU, Farage rejoices” and online added “Rumours of Cameron’s resignation. Sterling plunges, financial markets in panic”. 

The editor of La Repubblica Mario Calabresi tweeted: "Britain is leaving. It always kept one foot outside Europe, but Europe will now be smaller and more fragile”.

Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), makes a statement after Britain voted to leave on the European Union

US

The New York Times declared “British stun world with vote to exit EU shaking markets” and fuelled speculation over David Cameron’s future as Prime Minister. 

The paper added: “The result left Prime Minister David Cameron, who led the charge for Britain to remain a member of the European Union, badly weakened and at risk of losing his job” and declared the result a “disaster” for the EU. 

In a bleak opinion piece the LA Times said: “British voters willfully walked off a cliff when they decided to leave the European Union. The “Brexit” victory is a defeat for Britain, Europe and the global economy.”

The West Coast US paper added “Britain is once again an island” and highlighted how the vote divided the UK. 

“British exit from the EU sets up a European crisis on diminished power” led the Washington Post. 

The US paper added Brexit has “plunged the 28-nation into an existential crisis, dealing the dream of an integrated Europe its greatest blow since the march toward unity began in the aftermath of World War Two.” 

The Post also focused on how the markets have reacted as the pound plunged by more than 11 per cent to its lowest level since 1985. 

UK

Special 5am editions were produced after the historic poll with every paper leading on Brexit. 

