Angela Merkel urges EU leaders to maintain CLOSE relations with UK in wake of Brexit

2016-06-24

EPA 

But in her first public address since the nation backed a Leave vote, the German chancellor called for Brussels to maintain "close future relations" with Britain. 

Mrs Merkel said we are "living in a world of turmoil" as she urged Europe to remain “calm and composed” in the wake of the historic Brexit result. 

She said: "We have to remain calm and composed. We need to make composed analysis and decisions. 

"The EU is one of the world's largest economic areas, a guarantor of peace and stability. 

GETTY 

 We must engage with the world. I believe the world will stand united

Angela Merkel

"We must engage with the world. I believe the world will stand united."

She added: “We need to make sure that Europe is varied, and as varied as the people of the EU are.

“Time and time again we are confronted with people that have doubts over the direction that the EU has taken. 

“We have to make sure that people feel that the EU can make a contribution to people’s lives.”

Mrs Merkel described the EU as a “unique community of solidarity and values". 

The German leader confirmed she will meet with the European Council president Donald Tusk, French president Francois Hollande and Italy’s prime minister Matteo Renzi in Berlin on Monday. 

GETTY 

Brexit: What to expect next

Britain's momentous decision for an exodus has sent shockwaves around the world, with the UK's allies and rivals scrambling to assess the implications of the vote.

The presidents of the European Commission, Council and Parliament will also hold a joint press conference in Brussels to set out their initial response to the demand for Brexit. 

EPA 

Leave officially passed the winning mark just after six o'clock this morning as voters demanded the UK untangle itself from the 28-country bloc.

At 7.25am the official result declared Britain had voted for Brexit by 51.9 per cent to 48.1 per cent.

Overall, with all votes now counted, 17,410,742 Britons voted to quit the EU with 16,141,241 voting to Remain. 



 

