Elizabeth Hurley posts naked snap as she admits 'I'm for Brexit'

2016-06-22

 Every voice matters. Vote tomorrow- whatever your persuasion. I'm voting #Brexit #voteleave No gloating from the winners- no whinging from the losers VOTE!! ????????????????????????????????????

A photo posted by Elizabeth Hurley (@elizabethhurley1) on Jun 22, 2016 at 6:03am PDT

The mother-of-one made her opinion known by posting a saucy snap on her social media accounts today.

In the picture, Liz is naked and is covering her modesty with a large Union Jack cushion.

She captioned the picture: "Every voice matters. Vote tomorrow- whatever your persuasion. I'm voting #Brexit #voteleave No gloating from the winners- no whinging from the losers VOTE!!"

Of course, the 51-year-old's post was met with many comments - mostly positive.

"Good Lord Liz. Whilst I'm #BrExit for the facts, that sure as hell is one big persuasion right there," one person wrote, while another added: "Wowww looking absolutely stunning damn." 

 First day back on set #TheRoyals season 3. Filming at Brocket Hall @theroyalsone ??????

A photo posted by Elizabeth Hurley (@elizabethhurley1) on Jun 21, 2016 at 8:11am PDT



The Bedazzled actress' admission comes after football star David Beckham declared that he would be voting 'remain' in the upcoming referendum. 

In a rather lengthy Instagram post which he shared with his 24.3 million followers yesterday morning, the former footballer wrote: "We live in a vibrant and connected world where together as a people we are strong."

His message was posted alongside a snap of him in his Manchester United days as he celebrates scoring a goal.

 I'm passionate about my country and whatever the result of Thursday's referendum, we will always be Great.  Each side has the right to their opinion and that should always be respected whatever the outcome of the European Referendum. I played my best years at my boyhood club, Manchester United.  I grew up with a core group of young British players that included Ryan Giggs, Paul Scholes, Nicky Butt and the Neville Brothers.  Added to that was an experienced group of older British players such as Gary Pallister, Steve Bruce and Paul Ince. Now that team might have gone on to win trophies but we were a better and more successful team because of a Danish goalkeeper, Peter Schmeichel, the leadership of an Irishman Roy Keane and the skill of a Frenchman in Eric Cantona. I was also privileged to play and live in Madrid, Milan and Paris with teammates from all around Europe and the world. Those great European cities and their passionate fans welcomed me and my family and gave us the opportunity to enjoy their unique and inspiring cultures and people. We live in a vibrant and connected world where together as a people we are strong.  For our children and their children we should be facing the problems of the world together and not alone. For these reasons I am voting to Remain

A photo posted by David Beckham (@davidbeckham) on Jun 21, 2016 at 12:15am PDT



David's views have been shared by a host of big names including Keira Knightley, Benedict Cumberbatch, Simon Cowell and Helena Bonham Carter.

Pirates of the Caribbean actress Keira made headlines earlier this month when she appeared in a campaign video for pro-EU group We Are Europe and called on the younger British generation to vote.

Her opinion was shared by Sherlock star Benedict who told RT: "Britain is not just stronger in Europe, it is more imaginative and more creative."

???????????????????????? don't forget to vote!????????????????

OUT !!!??????????????????????????????????????????

Other stars who will join Liz in voting out in the referendum include Sir Michael Cain and Dame Joan Collins. 

Explaining his desire to leave, veteran actor Michael said recently: "Unless there is some extremely significant change, we should get out. You cannot be dictated to by thousands of faceless civil servants."

Actress and author Joan has been vocal about her 'out' vote on social media and just hours ago urged her followers to quit the EU.

"Don't forget to vote," she enthused, before aptly adding: "OUT!!!"

