Today’s Britain is strong, dynamic and influential. Let’s keep it that way VOTE LEAVE

2016-06-19

GETTY

On Thursday, the responsibility for the future of this nation will be taken away from Westminster and will rest entirely in your hands.

A referendum many of us believed would never take place is being held. The result will determine the shape of this nation for decades to come.

We believe this is the most important vote in the UK for a generation. It is not a minor bill on electoral reform, or a general election, where a moment of rashness or a regretted decision offers a chance to put things right in fi ve years’ time. The consequences will be dramatic and long lasting for you and your family.

On Thursday, the power rests fi rmly in your hands and we urge you to seize the opportunity and vote wisely to leave the European Union.

This paper has long highlighted the problems associated with the EU and has never been scared to tell our readers precisely what is going on behind closed doors. And you, our loyal readers, have responded in your thousands by telling us that you overwhelmingly reject the status quo.



According to an online poll of our readers carried out last month, 93 per cent of you back Brexit. However, leaving the EU is still not a forgone conclusion.

That’s is why it is a decision that should weigh heavily on the shoulders of those who have yet to make up their minds and are likely to hold the balance.

It is to those undecided voters who we appeal to today to set Britain free and unshackle her from her EU chains.

For the past few months, the noise from all sides has clouded the argument. Rather than presenting rational facts on which to base a straightforward decision, it has become a contest to see who can shout the loudest and attract the most powerful friends to their cause. 

Well, politicians, experts and presidents can shriek as loudly as they wish.

They won’t be at your side in the polling booth. Let battalions of economists howl their forecasts of doom – they won’t be the ones with the pen in their hand this week.

Project Fear, that great governmental machine, has been brought into play to frighten you, to influence your vote.

In a way, they are right – leaving the EU may have a dramatic outcome as the Prime Minister spells out in his exclusive article for the Sunday Express today.

But we say those consequences are to be embraced, not feared. We know our readers love our country even if they do not love what they fear it will become.

We know our readers also love Europe but hate the EU. It is those who love Europe, its diversity, its history and its humanity who should be the most enthusiastic about Brexit.

A paradox? Not at all. The EU, as currently constituted, has run out of road. It is doomed to fail, sooner or later, with catastrophic consequences and the only way forward is for one major country to break ranks and show that there can be a better alternative.



A British departure from the EU, if executed correctly, could save Europe from itself. We know that it is just the fear of the unknown which is holding us back – so it is this fear that we will attempt to assuage. Europe will not change. It may say it will – it may profess to be willing to listen to our concerns.

But why should we believe a word of this? If ever there was a perfect example of the contempt in which the EU holds change, it was when Mr Cameron arrived for his renegotiations.

Here was the leader of the fi fth biggest economy in the world, one of the most important member states in Europe, warning that unless we had meaningful change, the UK may leave.

What did he receive? Hours of legal wrangling and then sent away with crumbs which in reality amount to nothing.





GETTY

Even the most vociferous of Mr Cameron’s opponents would have felt sorry for him as he tried to present the package from Brussels as a meaningful new deal.

A success even. So if this is Europe’s response when we have them over a barrel, what will it be when the tides are turned and we no longer have the threat of leaving to wield at them?

Instead, they will see any vote to remain as not only an endorsement of the status quo, but as a recommendation for project Europe and a green light for ever further integration and expansion.

If there is one area where Mr Cameron’s government has sensationally failed it is its promise to bring down immigration.

In the past year net migration has risen to 330,000 – the second highest figure on record.

The Government can do nothing to stop the 185,000 people from within the EU who decided to make Britain their home last year.



GETTY

There is no legislation it can pass that will supercede the EU rules on free movement. It means 500 million people in Europe, from Paris, to Spain, to the islands of Greece, could come and live here tomorrow if they chose to do so, and Parliament would be powerless to stop it.

And soon even more countries, including Turkey, Albania and Serbia, could be welcomed to the club. Leave has focused on immigration because it is such a compelling argument.

It has been met with the traditional cries of racism, as though it were a crime to safeguard the interests of your own citizens.

It is not xenophobia; it is old-fashioned common sense. Leave accepts there is a need for a certain level of migration, but it must be controlled.

The points system appears a sensible way of doing this. How could it be racist to endorse a system which would allow more, not less, people in from our old Commonwealth allies of Australia, Canada, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and the West Indies?

GETTY

With the door closed on the European free for all we would be able to do so. Britain would be no less tolerant or multicultural if it left the comparatively un-diverse EU – it may even be more so. But we will not be forced to accept millions without question simply because they have 12 stars on their passports.

Leave has been repeatedly ordered to present its economic plans for coming out of the European Union.

Firstly, we say it has no obligation to do so. If your house is on fi re and you have the chance to escape, you get out – you don’t phone your family to check they have a bed spare before fleeing the inferno.

Secondly, why would Europe not want to trade with us? Would it really take such umbrage at our decision to leave that it would put up barricades as an example to others?

Had Scotland chosen to leave the UK, would England have done its worst to ensure it suffered? Of course not.

It would have wholeheartedly embraced its new neighbour and worked hard to ensure both countries thrived.

Even if Europe did attempt to make trade diffi cult, with that door closed another is opened; that to the rest of the world.

President Barack Obama attempted to do Downing Street a favour with his ill-judged warning that we would be at the “back of the queue” for any trade deals.

It was a typical Project Fear ploy. Here is the most powerful man in the world, in charge of the world’s biggest economy, with a stark warning.



GETTY

But remember this; he will not be in charge come November. He will not be casting a vote come Thursday.

Indeed, Donald Trump, the Republican presidential hopeful, has said that if he became the leader of the free world, Britain will always be treated “fantastically well” even if it left the EU.

But even without America, we still have the Commonwealth.Canada – one of the world’s richest countries – awaits, not to mention the fast growing might of India and China.

Economists hate uncertainty. That is why the market is suffering now. But any shocks after Brexit, any fall in the pound or rise to your mortgage costs, will likely be short lived.

The long-term outlook, unshackled to a Eurozone which is predicted to implode, should be far brighter.

