'We could RESHAPE EUROPE' EU politicians claim Brexit is a great opportunity for THEM

2016-06-18

GETTY

Leading politicians across the 28-country bloc are said to be preparing for a British exit, with discussions already taking place on reshaping the EU after the UK leaves. 

In stark contrast to the prophets of doom predicting the "end of Western politician civilisation" after a Brexit, a number of European politicians have said Britain pulling out would give them a great opportunity. 

Arguing a Brexit would provide the bloc with a great opportunity to make reforms, former Belgian Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt said: "Why should we be afraid of a Brexit? 

"If it happens we could use this occasion to reshape Europe." 

In an interview with German media, vice president of the EU commission Viviane Reding said: "Sometimes a divorce is better than sticking it out with too many compromises." 

Ms Reding also said a reduction in the size of the EU is the best way forward, saying: "We need a 'core Europe' and we'll have to realise this quickly."

GETTY

France is said to be poised for a Brexit in hopes it would allow the leading EU member to take an even more central role in the European club. 

While leading French politicians say they want Britain to remain in the EU, many political figures have said a Brexit would allow France and Germany to push ahead with their vision for an "ever closer union". 

Several French commentators have argued a Brexit would benefit the EU in the long-term, with one even urging British voters to vote Leave to "save" Europe. 

 Why should we be afraid of a Brexit?

Guy Verhofstadt

In a tongue and cheek open letter in a left-wing French newspaper, Jean Quatremer said Britons who vote Remain on June 23 would "ruin" the lives of their fellow Europeans and eventually see David Cameron rule the continent. 

Some financial experts have also predicted the Paris economy would benefit greatly from a Brexit, with HSBC declaring it would move 1,000 jobs to the French capital if the UK decides to leave. 

Business expert and academic Claude Mosseri-Marlio wrote in right-wing newspaper Le Figaro: "If predictions of a UK exit from the EU become reality, it could actually be an opportunity for France, for its internal growth as well as on the international stage". 



The comments come as France warned of making Britain suffer if it opts to leave the EU by shunning the UK when establishing new immigration and financial rules. 

The French will also push other EU members to take a hardline approach to Britain over unwinding treaties and agreements binding the UK to the 28-nation bloc, according to an EU source quoted by Politico.

