Panic? PM says 'Brits don't quit' in desperate appeal just two days before EU vote

2016-06-21

The Prime Minister urged Britons to stay in the EU on Thursday as he stood outside the door to Number 10.

He told voters opting to quit the EU this week would create “risks for your families and you should not take them”.

Mr Cameron said: "For you, for your family, for the future of our country, vote Remain."

Insisting Britain “will leave Europe for good” in the event of a Brexit, the Tory leader asked those of his generation and older to “think about the hopes and dreams of your children and grandchildren” before deciding how to vote.

He said: “I know Europe isn't perfect, believe me I understand and I see those frustrations. I feel them myself.

"That's why we negotiated and enhanced our special status - out of the euro, keeping our borders, not involved in ever closer union. We have the best of both worlds.

"So as you take this decision, whether to remain or leave, do think about the hopes and dreams of your children and grandchildren.

“They know their chances to work, to travel, to build the sort of open and successful society they want to live in rests on this outcome.

"And remember, they can't undo the decision we take. If we vote out, that's it. It is irreversible. We will leave Europe for good.

"The next generation will have to live with the consequences far longer than the rest of us."

PA

PA

 Brits don’t quit, we get involved, we take a lead, we make a difference, we get things done

David Cameron

Mr Cameron also told voters: “Brits don’t quit, we get involved, we take a lead, we make a difference, we get things done.”

By using the trappings of his office to campaign for a Remain vote, the Prime Minister will face claims he has breached ‘purdah’ regulations.

These rules ban the Government or civil servants from using their official business in a way that could influence the outcome of a vote.

The Government seal was noticeably left off the podium Mr Cameron spoke from.

Guidance issued by ministers before the purdah period was enforced on May 27 states: “Government property should not be used for campaigning.

“Requests from campaigning groups to use government buildings for campaign purposes must be declined.”

PA•REUTERS

Sources in the Leave camp said Mr Cameron’s comments revealed he had been left with nothing new to talk about as polls refuse to swing decisively in his favour.

Ukip MP Douglas Carswell said the Remain camp have “little more to say” on the case for Britain remaining under Brussels’ rule.

Steve Hilton, Mr Cameron's former policy guru and Leave supporter, labelled the statement given by the Prime Minister as "weird".

He told BBC News: "It was very interesting actually and rather an amazing thing to hear because what you just saw from the Prime Minister was an admission that they have lost the economic argument, they have lost the argument on immigration and so he has been wheeled out by rather panicky spin doctors, it seems to me, to try and change the subject."

Mr Hilton said there was "nothing new" in what the Prime Minister said.

Prime Minister David Cameron with his wife Samantha leave 10 Downing Street for the last time after speaking to the press to visit Buckingham Palace to formally tender his resignation to the Queen on July 13, 2016

A series of recent polls have shown the EU referendum at neck-and-neck between Leave and Remain.

A YouGov poll published this morning showed a two point lead for Brexit.

The online survey, excluding undecided voters, showed 51 per cent will vote to Leave the EU on Thursday with 49 per cent saying they will vote to Remain.

An ORB poll also published today found support for Remain at 53 per cent, up five points on their previous study, with support for Leave down three points on 46 per cent.

Moments before the Prime Minister spoke, pollsters Survation published their final telephone survey before Thursday’s vote to reveal support for Remain at 51 per cent with Leave on 49 per cent.

The polls appear to confirm signs of a swing back to Remain as the EU referendum campaign enters its final week.

A week ago, Downing Street was said to have been left panicked by a previous YouGov poll that showed a staggering seven point lead for Brexit.

Downing Street has been contacted for comment on purdah rules by Express.co.uk.

