Outrage after French minister claims Brexit would give Britain 'significance of Guernsey'

2016-06-20

GETTY

Emmanuel Macron, the economy minister for France, claimed a vote for Brexit would isolate the UK from its trading partners on Europe's borders.

But his comments - the second time he has warned against Brexit - have sparked outrage among Brexit campaigners.

In an interview with Le Monde, the former investment banker said: "Leaving the EU would mean the Guernseyfication of the UK, which would then be a little country globally.

"It would isolate itself and become a trading post and arbitration place at Europe's border."

GETTY

 Leaving the EU would mean the Guernseyfication of the UK, which would then be a little country globally.

Emmanuel Macron

Tipped by some to become his country's next president, Macron warned the European Council would have to send "a very firm message and timetable" to the UK on the consequences.

He added a vote for Brexit on Thursday was likely to be disastrous for the UK.

However not everyone agrees that becoming more like Guernsey would be a bad thing.

GETTY

Known for its cows and ice cream, the Channel Island of Guernsey has a population of just 65,000, and its economy mainly relies on financial services and tourism.

The island is also particularly popular as an offshore financial centre for private equity clients.

Ukip employment spokeswoman Jane Collins said: "It would be great if the UK could be like Guernsey: well off, self governing with low unemployment.

"The British people are being bombarded by all sides by Project Threat and what we really don't need is to be lectured by a country in financial difficulties like France about our economy.

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

GETTY

"We will be richer, more prosperous and better able to fund our social services outside the EU: what's not to like?

"Perhaps the French government is concerned about its farmers losing subsidies which come from higher food prices and British EU contributions?"

MEP Ray Finch added: "An absurd comment from a frightened man. He knows it, we know it and everybody else knows it.

"It is apiece with Napoleon's dismissal of the UK as a nation of shopkeepers, and we know how that worked out for Napoleon."

