Osborne pays tribute to Jo Cox as he reveals MP changed Government view on refugees

2016-06-17

Delivering his annual Mansion House speech in the City of London, the Chancellor admitted the 41-year-old’s passionate lobbying for greater help for those fleeing Syria’s civil had “contributed to a change in policy”.

Mr Osborne tore up his original speech ahead of last night’s event, where he traditionally comments on the state of the British economy, after the news of Mrs Cox’s death.

The Batley and Spen MP was fatally shot and stabbed in her constituency yesterday afternoon.

Since being elected to Parliament in May last year, the 41-year-old had repeatedly called for Britain to do more the help those fleeing conflict and persecution in the war-torn Middle East

Before becoming an MP, Mrs Cox previously worked for the charity Oxfam.

Ditching the traditional black tie dress for last night’s event, Mr Osborne praised the “hugely liked and respected” MP.

He said: “I know people always say that kind of thing on these occasions but in her case it was absolutely true.

“Jo fought to help the refugees from the Syrian civil war and she gave a voice  to those whose cry for help she felt was not being heard.

“It changed attitudes and I know it contributed to a change in policy.

“She will never know how many lives she helped to transform.”

GETTY

 She will never know how many lives she helped to transform

George Osborne

In September last year, David Cameron announced Britain would take in up to 20,000 Syrian refugees from camps near the border of the conflict-riddled country.

Last month, the Prime Minister bowed to growing pressure and said the UK would accept unaccompanied child refugees from across Europe.

The Government had previously ruled out taking in lone vulnerable youngsters from the continent.

Nine days before Mr Cameron’s U-turn, Mrs Cox had praised the “generosity” of the Government towards Syrian refugees but urged ministers to be “brave and bold” and “do the right thing” over child refugees in Europe.

In a passionate speech in the House of Commons, she said she “would risk life and limb to get my two precious babies out of that hellhole” in Syria.

