UK Charity SLAMS EU for ‘putting profits before lives’ with ‘half-hearted’ new policy

2016-06-17

GETTY

The Scottish Catholic International Aid Fund (SCIAF) claimed “corporate power is being put before human rights” as it accused the EU of watering down plans outlawing conflict minerals – unregulated mined materials from nations including Colombia and the Democratic Republic of Congo.

The SCIAF released a scathing statement on the EU’s “half hearted measure” to outlaw conflict minerals.

They said: “Yesterday’s decision by the European Union to water down plans to outlaw conflict minerals demonstrates corporate power is being put before human rights and the wellbeing of ordinary people.

“Trade in minerals such as gold, tantalum and coltan fund some of the world’s most brutal conflicts.

GETTY

“We constantly see the horror caused by unregulated mining in countries like Colombia and the Democratic Republic of Congo.”

The deal settled by the EU aims to ensure that minerals entering the bloc are sourced responsibly – but only takes into account raw materials that are shipped into European member states.

They added: “The EU needs to clamp down on companies using these minerals in any shape or form, either as raw materials or in finished products.

“Only then will we prevent human rights violations and atrocities which tear communities apart and destroy innocent lives.

GETTY

 We’ll urge this half-hearted measure to be updated with a comprehensive deal which puts human lives before private profit.

SCIAF

“The current deal promises a review of the effectiveness of the law within a few years. When the time comes, we’ll urge this half-hearted measure to be updated with a comprehensive deal which puts human lives before private profit.

It comes as the Remain camp expects a surge of support from Scotland in the upcoming referendum on a British exit from the Union.

Majority ruling party the SNP have been campaigning to stay in the upcoming vote next Thursday, but have hit out at Remainers in the Treasury for campaigning with “overblown” reports reminiscent of those used in the Scottish referendum.

GETTY

Nigel Farage holds up his British passport during the debate

Speaking last month party leader Nicola Sturgeon said: “I think certainly in Scotland we’ve got lots of examples of Treasury reports during referendum campaigns and I think people have gotten savvy to see through some of the overblown claims.

“Of course there would be an economic impact, short medium and long term if there was a vote to leave the European union but I’m much more interested in the reasons to stay in the European union, the positive reasons.”

