Final thoughts on referendum battle from Frederick Forsyth

2016-06-24

GETTY

But win, lose or draw there are some things that are clear after the tumult of the past 10 weeks. There are two ways of winning in life: honourably and sleazily.

If David Cameron has won his fanatical struggle to ensure our country’s subordination to a remote, unelected commission of super-bureaucrats in Brussels continues, he will have won on the back of the sleaziest campaign I have ever seen – and I have seen a few, usually in banana republics.

He first told us our country was more than robust enough to thrive and prosper without the constant interference of Brussels. That was two years ago. Then he told us he personally intended to negotiate a fundamental reform of the EU so that we could continue our membership with easy minds – our sovereignty would not be in peril.

Then, against the odds, he won the 2015 election. The polls had confidently predicted another coalition in which he knew he could rely on Nick Clegg to veto the referendum legislation. So… no chance of one at all.

Having won, he could not avoid it. Then he went on his several tours of European capitals seeking the promised reform. He failed miserably but insisted he’d succeeded magnificently – the usual Foreign Office position.

Since then he never referred to the EU without saying “reformed” in front of it. (Even at the end, various overpromoted mediocrities were saying we should remain inside in order to “reform the EU from within”.

Fact: without unanimity it is utterly unreformable and unanimity – we are one against 27 – is a pipe dream.) Finally he did yet another U-turn and led a fanatical Remain campaign that was effectively rigged.

He began with a tissue of provable lies, printing millions of copies and mailing to millions of households at the taxpayer’s expense – £9.3million. He followed up by splitting the Conservative Party down the middle with personal insults that have destroyed his credibility and made the reconstitution of the party nighon impossible.

All this could have been avoided if he had simply presided but taken no sides, leaving the fanaticism to the liars in the Treasury, inventing figure after future figure and calling them facts.

He talked the country down as a pretty rubbish nation that cannot pass its own laws in its own parliament but must have a governess in Brussels to do it for us. Downing Street drafted a blizzard of pro-Remain letters, then rang around various common-interest groups to instruct them to endorse the letters in the media.

The onceneutral civil service has behaved like a harlot (power without responsibility, according to Lord Acton) and I find it impossible to believe the Remain campaign did not wildly exceed the equal campaign budget rules.

The expenditures involved on the Remain side were astronomical. So even if he has won, I predict three things with confidence. Brussels has in the pipeline a torrent of fresh legislation which we cannot impede but which will diminish us further.

There is a massive crisis in the eurozone just over the horizon and when it happens we cannot be sheltered from it, even being outside the euro. And finally within a year and a half several million voting Remain – the fearful, timid, gullible and self-servers – will wish they had not.

Or we may be able to begin right now recovering our lost sovereignty within a true parliamentary democracy which we once were.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

GETTY

LAST weekend I had occasion to go to the Melrose Literary Festival which is in the Borders, a part of Scotland I had never seen before. Though I have been to Edinburgh, Glasgow, Aviemore and Grantown-on-Spey, the Borders were new to me and what a lovely part of the country they are.

The same applies to the people. I had never realised how steeped in history that area just north of Northumberland really is. As we sped along from Berwick-upon-Tweed to the town of Melrose there were signposts on both sides of the road to places that rang a bell.

Stirling (a big battle long ago), Hawick (the cashmere jumpers), Coldstream (the Guards) and Jedburgh (commando training school in the Second World War). The area reeks of our common history.

My host was Rory Bremner who has a place up there and I was billeted at the Fauhope Country House hotel, to be looked after by the lovely Sheila Robson. The speakers included some merry rogues – Jim Naughtie, AA Gill, Michael Morpurgo and Rory himself.

The scoff was excellent, the mood congenial and the weekend delightful. The Tweed flowed sedately through the valley and (not always guaranteed in Scotland in my experience) the sun shone.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

GETTY

SOME years ago I found myself taking a coffee in a café in Marylebone, London. Seated at the next table was Clement Freud making a fuss over a pretty young girl. He was clearly identifiable from the dog food adverts on television.

At the time my two sons were schoolboys but I had always wanted to complete the family with a daughter. I made a remark to the effect it must be wonderful to have a daughter. He glowered at me in rage and was extremely abrupt.

End of conversation. Later I realised the child could not be his own because his two girls were already grown up. Last week I read the headlines and surmised the child was probably being groomed. Most unpleasant. Happily that was my one and only meeting with Sir Clement.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

GETTY

IT seems nowadays no matter what you seek to do, no matter how harmless, you run slap into a wall of bureaucracy.

The CO and I thought a four-day break in Cornwall might be pleasant but as the run from the Home Counties to (almost) the end of the kingdom takes about six hours the CO wished for a larger and more comfortable saloon car than the small runabout we use locally.

She contacted a car-hire firm who duly turned up in the drive with the online-chosen car – and a sheaf of paperwork. We spent half an hour producing passports (to prove who we were), utility bills to prove we lived in our own house, credit cards (perfectly in order) and of course driving licences – both current, valid and free of penalty points.

Then the car-hire rep needed me to ring DVLA in Swansea to confirm our licences were not forgeries or smothered in penalty points. Swansea answered the phone after a long multi-choice recording but the young lady told me she could not “access” the information but would ring back… in maybe an hour.

The rep could not wait that long and we did not need him standing in the kitchen for an hour… or maybe a lot longer. He explained it was the insurance company who insisted on this rigmarole.

So the deal was cancelled – plus the Cornwall break. Well done computerised Britain. I am not a terrorist, cheat, liar, fraudster or criminal and am getting fed up being told I have to prove it before I can do the simplest thing.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

GETTY

IT is taking its time but very slowly yet surely the ghastly murder cult Islamic State is losing on the ground both in Iraq and Libya. The vital city of Fallujah is lost to them and the surprising thing is that in the last days the so-called suicidal fighters just melted away.

Further north, the even more vital city of Mosul is being relentlessly surrounded as the outlying villages fall one by one. If it was not that they use the remaining civilians as human shields, the terminal assault would have been launched by now.

But this cowardly and disgusting practice forces the liberating Kurds to stay their hand. The tales of horror, torture and mass murder prove, if further proof were needed, that the diehards of this cult deserve nothing but death.

A complete wipe-out is the only answer. In another blow to the ruthless leadership, the desertion rate is escalating. In Libya, which also fell too easily, their stronghold of Sirte, birthplace and deathplace of Gaddafi, is mostly back in liberators’ hands.

Only a boxed-in killing ground remains. But we cannot be complacent. The survivors are fleeing back to Europe; still armed, fanatical and dangerous.

