EU REFERENDUM: Here's how YOU can share your voice on Facebook

2016-06-23

GETTY

As Britain takes to the polls today to mark the historic EU referendum today, there's an easy way to show your support online.

Facebook users will be able to mark their profiles to let friends and family know that they've voted, simply by clicking a button.

When logging into your Facebook account, you should see a pop-up box at the top of your News Feed, giving you the option of clicking on a box that says "I voted".

FACEBOOK

Doing so creates an automatic status update telling your contacts that you have voted, accompanied by the iconic Facebook "like" thumbs-up.

There's no option to say which way you voted with the automatic status, but this information can be manually added.

The box also contains another option that can provide you with more information about the Referendum, as well as give information on your nearest polling station.

Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), makes a statement after Britain voted to leave on the European Union

If you click past the box initially and want to bring back the option, you still can, by clicking the smiley face icon underneath the status text box.

This brings up a menu entitled "add what you're doing or how you're feeling" - simply select the "more" menu here and you'll see the option to add that you've voted (pictured below).

Twitter users can also mark their efforts using a special #iVoted hashtag, which places a tickbox graphic into your status update. it is currently the top trending topic on the site.

FACEBOOK

The "I Voted" option was first added by Facebook in the UK for last year's general election in an effort to boost young people's interaction with voting and the democratic process, and was credited with boosting voter turnout.

The news comes as figures revealed Britons are talking about the United Kingdom leaving the EU around twice as much as they are discussing the Remain campaign.

Users on social media site Twitter seem much more preoccupied with the Leave campaign – racking up 800,000 mentions against the 400,000 for Remain.

According to an analysis by social monitoring tool Brandwatch, up until June 7 2016 there were 5.4 million tweets mentioning the EU referendum in the last two months.

Google unveiled search data around the In-Out EU referendum which also pointed to a greater emphasis on a Brexit.

