Is that you Victoria Beckham? Designer turns heads in bold yellow dress and trench

2016-06-24

GETTY

The fashion designer swapped her usual dark and monochrome attire for something the complete opposite as she ran errands solo.

Wearing her new shorter tresses down and keeping her sunglasses firmly on, the 42-year-old wowed in an all-yellow outfit.

Victoria complemented her sun-kissed skin in a silky lemon dress, complete with ruched detailing along the front, and a coordinated trench coat.

The former Spice Girl oozed glamour as she strutted along the street after polishing off her attire with nude heels.

GETTY

GETTY

Victoria Beckham in pictures

During her outing, Victoria gushed about her BFF Eva Longoria with her 11.3 million Instagram followers.

"@EvaLongoria, I couldn’t be more inspired by you. When women support each other, we accomplish amazing things. Celebrate the women who #LeanInTogether with you."

The mother-of-four's post comes after she spoke out following the EU Referendum's Vote Leave organisation trying to link her to their campaign.

GETTY

GETTY

 In response to the @leave.eu campaign who have today tried to put a spin on quotes made 20 years ago about keeping or losing the pound, I have to say strongly my comments were not about this referendum and should not be misused in this way! I believe in my country, I believe in a future for my children where we are stronger together and I support the #remain campaign. @strongerineurope

A photo posted by Victoria Beckham (@victoriabeckham) on Jun 21, 2016 at 3:14am PDT

Victoria, who is yet to respond to the Brexit result, wrote: "In response to the @leave.eu campaign, who have today tried to put a spin on quotes made 20 years ago about keeping or losing the pound, I have to say strongly my comments were not about this referendum and should not be misused in this way!

"I believe in my country, I believe in a future for my children where we are stronger together and I support the #remain campaign. @strongerineurope."

Her husband David, 41, was also in the Remain camp: "For our children and their children we should be facing the problems of the world together and not alone. For these reasons I am voting to Remain."



