Cameron 'can't be trusted on Turkey' - PM dodges questions over EU entry

2016-06-20

The Prime Minister sidelined the question three times in his last TV debate before Thursday’s vote, instead saying there is no prospect of Turkey becoming a member anytime soon.

Appearing on a special Question Time programme on Sunday evening, he said the issue was “the biggest red herring in this referendum debate” and voting to leave the EU based on whether Turkey will be allowed into the bloc or not would be a “crazy thing to do”.

However, he refused to say whether he would use Britain’s right to veto their entry or not.

 I think this is the biggest red herring in this whole referendum debate

David Cameron

Brexit campaigners said the reason Mr Cameron refused to answer the Turkey veto question is because he backs the east European country becoming a member and in his own words is the “strongest possible advocate” of Turkey joining.

Over the past six years his government has been an active supporter of Turkey joining.

In April, Britain’s Europe minister, David Lidington said: “The UK supports Turkey’s EU accession process.”

Just two years ago, Mr Cameron himself, said: “In terms of Turkish membership of the EU, I very much support that.” 

Vote Leave chief executive Matthew Elliott last night said: “You cannot trust Cameron on Turkey.”

Getty

His comments came after audience member Michael Tindale asked Mr Cameron if he would “veto the accession of Turkey into the EU”.

The Prime Minister replied: “'I don't think it's going to happen for decades, so as far as I'm concerned the question doesn't arise.

“I think this is the biggest red herring in this whole referendum debate. I can't find a single expert anywhere in the country or in Europe who thinks that Turkey's going to join the EU in the next three decades.

Getty

“This issue doesn't arise and I feel strongly about this because people are getting through their letterbox leaflets from Leave saying basically Turkey's going to join the EU – not true; there's going to be a European army with Britain in it – not true; and we give £350million a week to Brussels – not true. 

“If we want to vote to leave let's not do it on the basis of three things that are completely untrue.”

The audience jeered at Mr Cameron after Mr Dimbleby also pressed him on the issue and he just replied: “It’s not going to come up”.

Getty

Getty

He added: “If this was going to happen in the next couple of years I would not support it, but it's not.” 

Mr Dimbleby questioned why he would not say if he will veto Turkish entry in the future, but the Prime Minister said Britain was being “positive” towards Turkey because it wants it to be a “Western-leaning” country.

However, he admitted it “isn’t going very well at the moment”.

British Prime Minister David Cameron speaks at Downing Street

Audience members were not impressed with Mr Cameron’s performance on the show, with several attacking the Government for its approach to EU immigration.

Some accused him of being patronising after he said voters have been finding the debate “perhaps quite confusing”.

With the referendum just four days away, he said he needed to do “better” in getting the Remain campaign’s message across.

A Brexit supporter branded Mr Cameron a “21st Century Neville Chamberlain” as he challenged the Tory leader over reforms he secured from Brussels earlier this year.

He said: “Mr Cameron, you say your policy that you’ve negotiated with Europe cannot be overruled. 

“It can, so are you really the 21st century Neville Chamberlain waving a piece of paper in the air saying to the public this is what I have, I have this promise where a dictatorship in Europe can overrule it?

“Answer the questions yes or no.”

In a bid to defend his position, the Prime Minister, said: “The other 27 prime ministers and presidents have agreed it and they know if Britain votes to remain they will implement it.

”And I think, you know it this not some empire or dictatorship. 

“We’re proving through this referendum that if Britain wants to leave this organisation we can. We’re a sovereign country.

“If we choose to leave we can leave.”

Tory Prime Minister from 1937 to 1940, Mr Chamberlain is famously remembered for exclaiming “peace for our time” while waving a piece of paper, signifying an agreement made with Berlin less than a year before the Second World War broke out. 

