EU referendum notebook: Project Fear has turned into PROJECT SNEER

2016-06-16

GETTY

As George Osborne kept ramping up the economic terror message in a bid to bring voters to heel, other Remaners became increasingly angry that the strategy does not seem to be working.

On the Thames, Bob Geldof and some distinctly posh-looking London kids - perhaps we should call them The Boomtown Brats - showed their contempt for our trawlermen as they sailed past Parilament to highlight their plight under the Common Fisheries Policy.

Meanwhile, on BBC Radio Cambridgeshire, a Labour councillor in Peterborough, Councillor Ed Murphy, declared that many working class people were set to Vote Leave because they were "uneducated".

Both of these incidents are likely to damage the Remain camp. Take Geldof (somebody please, take Geldof).

Here we have a multimillionaire Irish rock star on board a pleasure cruiser flicking V-signs at a group of people who command huge public sympathy.

I have taken part in many debates and public meetings over recent months and whenever the plight of our trawlermen has come up, the intensity of support for their cause has been readily apparent.

Indeed on the BBC East referendum debate that I took part in on Sunday, it was when the fate of the fishing fleet in Lowestoft was raised that the Remain team really lost the sympathy of the audience.

Turning to Councillor Murphy, he cited polling research showing that university graduates are far more likely to back Remain than are people who left school at 16.

GETTY

Yet to conclude from such research that Leave supporters are too stupid to understand the issue is outrageous arrogance.

In reality, graduates are likely to be far more affluent and to benefit from cheaper nannies, cleaners and builders ushered in by EU freedom of movement.

By contrast, working class people have seen their wages compressed, housing shortages hit them harder, public services that they rely on put under added pressure and their neighbourhoods lose social cohesion.

In my experience, working class voters are generally very patriotic too and highly aware of the impact of the negative impact of EU membership on our sense of national identity.

In short, they are not backing Leave because they are uneducated, but because they have taken a common sense look at what the EU has done for their families, their neighbourhoods and their country and they do not like what they see.

It is however very useful to the Leave campaign when remainers exhibit such lofty disdain for large groups of voters. In Peterborough we shall be using Councillor Murphy's remarks as an added motivation to get our vote out for Leave.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

GETTY

I HAD a personal encounter with Project Sneer in St Albans last weekend when one Remainer looked at me as if I was something the cat had dragged in and told me: "I think it is very sad what you are doing."

She then regaled me with news that her mother was voting Remain because she had grown up in wartime and could therefore do no different. I replied that my mother had grown up in the war too and could not wait to Vote Leave!

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

GETTY

WE have just a week to go now until polling day. So much has happened since the Daily Express launched its crusade for Brexit in November 2010. Back then we were derided and almost the whole political and media class predicted we were wasting our time.

I am not declaring that we are definitely going to win next Thursday - there are too many imponderables to rely on narrow opinion poll leads - but I am saying we are right in the hunt.

It has been a fantastic effort by Daily Express readers and journalists alike. I would like to thank everyone who filled in those campaign coupons back in 2010 and 2011 as we piled on the pressure to force David Cameron to pledge a referendum.

And I also implore you all to do what you can in your own neighbourhoods to spread the Brexit message. Put a poster or a board up to signal your support - it might well give added confidence to a wavering neighbour that the local community wants out.

If you can, please volunteer to help take part in the Get Out The Vote operation in your patch on the day.

This is going down to the wire and People Power in general and Daily Express Reader Power in particular could make all the difference.

