BRITAIN QUITS EU: UK votes to LEAVE Brussels in triumphant referendum result

2016-06-24

PA

The Leave campaign has swept to a resounding victory through the night, defying the initial polls.

Sky News and the BBC have projected the result as a win for the Leave camp, prompting calls for David Cameron to stand down as Prime Minister.

Despite the fact 60 regions are yet to declare their result, it is now deemed a certainty that the British electorate has chosen to remove itself from the EU.

Pressure is mounting on David Cameron to quit as Prime Minister after suffering an historic loss at the polls.

BBC Political Editor Laura Kuenssberg tweeted that a source said Boris Johnson and Michael Gove are "negotiating the terms of Cameron's departure".

And Nigel Farage. when asked if the Prime Minister should resign if the UK has voted for a Brexit, replied: “Immediately.”

And now Cameron's former spin doctor, Andy Coulson, said he suspects the Prime Minister is now be considering his position. 

TWITTER

PA

 I suspect that David Cameron is now pondering the possibility of stepping down

Andy Coulson

Mr Coulson said: "I think as we speak right now in Downing Street David Cameron is pondering that very thing.

"I suspect that there are a large number of people urging him to stay - hopefully pointing out to him that what we need now actually is leadership and to coin a phrase - it's no time for a novice, you need someone with experience, you need someone who understands the processes.

"But I suspect that David Cameron is now pondering the possibility of stepping down."

GETTY

Labour MP Simon Danczuk called questioned the validity of both Cameron and Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership.

He said: "I think Cameron will struggle actually - I think he'll have to go.

"But there's just a big a question over Jeremy's leadership because part of the postmortem is doing to be about asking 'why did we lose?'

"A good proportion of the vote which should have kept us in should have been Labour voters which Jeremy failed to convert into Remainers."

PA

GETTY

Boris Johnson is understood to be travelling to Vote Leave headquarters this morning but will not issue a statement until David Cameron delivered his own.

Shock results saw Sheffield, swathes of Labour’s northern heartland and Birmingham vote to leave the EU.

But the most unexpected result was that all of Wales wanted a Brexit, despite receiving more money from the EU than anywhere else in Britain.

REUTERS

The far reaching impact of a Vote Leave victory is already being felt, as it emerges Scotland could now have another referendum on remaining in the United Kingdom, sparking fears over the break-up of the United Kingdom.

Former Scottish First Minister, Alex Salmond said the timescale for another Scottish referendum will be dictated by when and if David Cameron begins negotiations for Britain to withdraw from the EU.

David Morris, MP for Morecambe and Lunesdale, said it was a "problem" that nations such as Scotland and Northern Ireland will now "almost certainly" hold referendums of their own.

The chair of the Parliamentary Space Committee said: "I think more referendums are more or less a certainty. Nicola Sturgeon andthe SNP are well within their rights to say they have a different view point to the UK.

"I know the SNP MPs and they're not demons - they're well organised. They have now got a massive mandate for a referendum and that's a problem."

Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), makes a statement after Britain voted to leave on the European Union

He also expressed concerns over the future of Northern Ireland's membership of the UK.

Mr Morris said: "Sinn Fein are already talking about doing the same - it's already started. My concern is that we slie off the path."

GETTY

GETTY

European politicians have reacted to the Brexit vote, with France's Front National, led by Marine Le Pen, calling it "a victory for freedom" and demanding a referendum in France.

Her niece, Marion Le Pen, who is granddaughter of FN founder Jean-Marie Le Pen, declared: "From Brexit to Frexit: it's now time to import democracy into our country. French people should have the right to choose."

Dutch nationalist Geert Wilders was also delighted at the UK vote, tweeting: "Hurrah for the British! Now it is our turn. Time for a Dutch referendum! £ByeByeEU".

MORE TO FOLLOW

