Why I'm voting LEAVE: Migrant chaos cannot continue, says LEO MCKINSTRY

2016-06-17

GETTY

The Brussels oligarchs prattle about their dream of unity and stability. Yet through their obsession with open borders they have plunged Europe’s citizens into a worsening nightmare of social collapse and ethnic division.

The savagery of the Brussels bombings, the mess of the Calais jungle camp and the brutality of sex attacks in Cologne are all potent symbols of the migration disaster.

This calamitous revolution is no accident. It is the result of a sinister, deliberate policy designed by the Eurocrats in pursuit of political integration.

Fixated by their goal of building a federal superstate they seek to obliterate traditional nationhood.

Such an outlook is perfectly captured in the words of Herman Van Rompuy who, as EU Commission president, in 2010 triumphantly declared that “the time of the homogenous nation state is over”.

The promotion of multicultural diversity, the abolition of border controls and the imposition of free movement are key weapons in this grandiose project to replace national identities with a new concept of European citizenship. Federalist fanatics are quite open about this aim.

“To my mind hardly anything so perfectly embodies the achievement of European unification as open borders,” said Martin Schulz, the president of the European Parliament and a German social democrat, last year. Even in the face of mounting catastrophe the EU’s rulers refuse to abandon their dogma.

They have decided the answer to the migration meltdown is to open the floodgates even more widely, hence the deal with the Islamist Turkish government to grant visa-free travel throughout most of the EU to its citizens. That move is likely to be the precursor to granting full EU membership to Turkey, which means that another 76 million Muslims could soon have the right to settle anywhere in the union.

GETTY

A massive new Turkish influx will be the death knell for Europe’s heritage.

Already immigration is spiralling out of control, with no fewer than 206,000 self-styled refugees having arrived from across the Mediterranean in the first five months of this year, on top of more than one million in 2015. This is in addition to the vast, unprecedented levels of legal migration that the EU continues to encourage from Africa, the Middle East and Asia.

For us in Britain the consequences of EU membership have become intolerable. Because of the Brussels doctrine of free movement more than 500 million people in Europe now have the right to live here.



 Brussels wants to destroy our independence

Desperate assurances from the pro-EU brigade that few will exercise that right are contradicted by the reality of ever-rising numbers. It is now conservatively estimated that there are at least 3.3 million EU migrants living in Britain, while even on the Government’s own figures there were 270,000 new arrivals last year.

But that statistic has little credibility. The real total is far higher since an astonishing 697,000 national insurance numbers were given out to EU migrants in the year to June 2015.

Moreover none of this includes the relentless waves of illegal migration that reach our shores in the back of lorries or on boats, exploiting the chronic border weaknesses of the EU regime.

As this newspaper revealed recently, every six minutes an illegal migrant is caught trying to sneak into Britain but this must be a tiny fraction of the number who succeed in evading the authorities. A heavy price is paid by the British public for this anarchy.

GETTY

As public services become stretched beyond breaking point, patients struggle to make appointments with their GPs, parents to find school places for their children and families to buy affordable homes. With England now one of the most densely populated countries in the world, overcrowding can be found everywhere from A&E units to public transport.

Mass immigration fuelled by the EU has brought squalor to our neighbourhoods and crime to our streets.

George Orwell wrote in 1940 that “the gentleness of English civilisation is its most marked characteristic”. How poignant those words sound today when parts of our urban landscape are scarred by filthy shanty towns and imported homelessness.

A recent study found that more than half of rough sleepers in London are foreigners. Our bulging jails contain almost 10,000 foreign prisoners – more than 4,000 of them from the EU – yet we are almost powerless to stop Europeans with criminal records from arriving here.

In one notorious recent case Lithuanian Victor Akulic was allowed into Britain despite having convictions in his homeland for grievous bodily harm and the rape of a seven-year-old girl. Having settled here he proceeded to rape a woman in Kent, a crime for which he received a life sentence.

“Do we have to take in anybody?” asked the exasperated judge in the case. The essential answer is yes, thanks to the EU.

GETTY

Indeed perverse European rules on human rights also regularly prevent the deportations of even serious criminals from this country.

Convicted Albanian double-killer Saliman Barci, who arrived in Britain posing as a Kosovan refugee and was given a luxurious London home as well as £2,000-a-month in benefits, recently won legal aid to fight his extradition on human rights grounds, claiming he would be abused in an Albanian prison.

Through open borders and the institutionalised surrender to militant Islam the EU has also allowed terrorism to flourish in our midst. There are now estimated to be about 5,000 jihadists at large in Europe, making a mockery of the pretence that EU membership “makes us safer”. Just the opposite is true. As the former head of Interpol Ronald K Noble put it, EU policy “is like hanging a sign welcoming terrorists to Europe”.

GETTY

In the face of mounting public anger the Remain campaigners adopt two responses. One is to blather on about the economic benefits of EU migrants. The other is to hurl accusations of xenophobia and racism at their opponents. But neither of these strategies have had any impact.

The economic argument is completely phoney given the huge burden that migrants impose on the civic infrastructure, especially the welfare system. Even David Cameron has admitted that more than 40 per cent of EU migrants are supported by benefits.

Just as importantly most of the electorate know that there is nothing remotely racist about wanting control over our own borders. On the contrary it is a democratic outrage that decisions over who is allowed to settle here should be taken by a foreign, unaccountable oligarchy.



The Remain lobby likes to claim that EU membership is in our “national interest”. But there will soon be no British nation at all if we remain under the rule of the unelected Brussels cabal, which wants to destroy our independence and transform the very fabric of our society.

We will become a place without a soul or a shared identity, nothing more than a provincial land mass inhabited by disparate groups, the majority of which have no connection to Britain.

In 1962 patriotic Labour leader Hugh Gaitskell warned European rule would mean “the end of a thousand years of history” for Britain.

Unless we seize the chance for freedom that prediction will swiftly become a grim reality.

