Anger as EU official ‘tries to point score’ over MP Jo Cox’s murder in Birstall

2016-06-17

GETTY • PA

Dimitris Avramopoulos - the European Commission’s top official on migration, home affairs and citizenship - posted on Twitter less than an hour after police announced Mrs Cox had died after being attacked in her Batley and Spen constituency.

Mr Avramopoulos, a former Greek minister, wrote: “Jo Cox murdered for her dedication to European democracy and humanity.

“Extremism divides and nourishes hatred. Solidarity with her beloved.”

Mrs Cox, a 41-year-old mother-of-two, was shot and stabbed repeatedly by a man who allegedly shouted ‘put Britain first’.

Mr Avramopoulos’ message attracted an overwhelmingly negative reaction on the social media site.

One wrote: “What? Are you point scoring? if so disgusting.”

A fellow poster added: “A wife & mother has just been murdered & you are trying to make political capital from it. Very poor taste.”

Suspect Tommy Mair, 52, was detained by police near his home in Birstall, West Yorkshire, following yesterday’s attack.

His brother has said he is "not a violent man and is not that political" and that he had a "history of mental illness, but he has had help".

Another Twitter user replied to the tweet, writing: “In such bad taste. Shame on you. RIP Jo Cox.”

And one simply told the EU official: ”You have no idea why she was murdered.”

Labour MP Rachel Reeves, who was seen in tears in Mrs Cox’s constituency this morning, urged caution about linking the pro-EU politician’s killing to the ongoing debate over Britain’s EU membership.

TWITTER

 I don't think we should link the EU referendum to Jo's death

Labour MP Rachel Reeves

Campaigners on both sides of the Brexit debate yesterday suspended their activities ahead of next week’s vote, following the news of Mrs Cox’s death.

Ms Reeves said: “There's of course going to be a lively debate around fundamental questions like our membership of the EU. 

“But, I don't think that's linked to what happened yesterday. I was at the vigil yesterday at Birstall parish church for Jo, where hundreds of her constituents came to pay tribute, not as a matter of courtesy but because they loved her, because she worked so hard for them.

“And I think if we're honest most MPs every week are doing that work for their constituents, but a lot of that gets ignored and forgotten in the commentary and I think maybe it is a time to reassess what the role of an MP is.

“Yes of course it's the debates about the big issues of our time, but also there is a role that MPs have serving their constituents.

“Often the last point of call is to go to an MP when they are desperate, whether that's on welfare, housing, anti-social behaviour or whatever. 

“We don't know what the motives were of the guy who attacked her yesterday. I don't think we should link the referendum to Jo's death.”

School children and teachers throw flowers on to the hearse carrying murdered Member of Parliament Jo Cox's as her funeral cortege will passes through Heckmondwike in northern Britain

Mrs Cox previously spent two years advising former Labour MEP Glenys Kinnock, the wife of ex-Labour leader Neil, before going on to work for charity Oxfam and ex-prime minister Gordon Brown’s wife Sarah.

The European Commission’s chief spokesperson Margaritis Schinas today paid tribute to Mrs Cox, who only entered Parliament in May last year.

He said: “Today on behalf of the European Commission and of the many colleagues here who knew her and worked with her we pay tribute to Jo Cox.

“Jo's death has shocked and saddened people across the world, including many here in Brussels.

“She had many close friend in this town and today they mourn a loss that is painful and hard to bear.

“Wherever she lived and worked Jo left behind a great store of love, affection and happy memories. This town is no exception.

“Jo devoted her life to public service and today we honour her memory.”

The European Commission would make no further comment.

