Piers Morgan calls Boris Johnson a 'c**k' during heated EU debate

2016-06-22

The two men were at odds and clashed, with the 51-year-old presenter calling the MP and head of the Leave Campaign a “cock” as the exchange came to an end. 

“Tomorrow you will either be the cock of the walk or the feather duster,” Piers told the 52-year-old politician as they finished their interview.

Co-star Susanna Reid said that it was a “good description” of the former Mayor of London. But Boris appeared to laugh off the throwaway remark. 

ITV

Piers made the comment after Boris said that his backing of the Brexit campaign was more than just about his personal politics. 

“Would you stand down? What would you do if the country rejects your Brexit campaign?” asked Piers.

Boris responded: “It is more important than one politician. I really think if we believe in ourselves and believe in Britain we will do well outside the EU.” 

ITV

ITV

ITV

 Tomorrow you will either be the cock of the walk or the feather duster

Piers Morgan

From the start of interview with Boris, it was clear that it was not going to go well as the politician spoke over the hosting duo as they tried to quiz him about his claims about the EU.

Susanna, 45, was seen rolling her eyes and saying: “Oh, it’s going to be one of those” as the MP talked over them.

Some of the source of contention came from the slogan on the side of the Leave campaign’s bus, which reads: “We send the EU £350 million a week, let’s fund our NHS instead.”

When asked about the message by Susanna, Boris switched between net and gross figures. 

Nigel Farage holds up his British passport during the debate

“I’m being very clear with people and it is sensible to talk about the net figure because it is not what we can control,” Boris told them.

Asked whether he had any regrets about joining the Leave camp, Boris replied: “No, I invite you to scour my rhetoric for anything remotely divisive. 

“Today what we’re talking about is who runs the UK. The EU is morphing into the United States of Europe. I think it is a big opportunity to speak about UK democracy.”  

Good Morning is on ITV on weekdays at 6am.

