At last, a chance to end the UK border control shambles

2016-06-24

GETTY

Immigration has been central to the referendum campaign, with millions of voters backing Leave because they think the UK is full up and fed up. Brexiters have argued the only way to control Britain’s migration crisis is to employ an Australian-style, points-based system which protects borders and the economy.

Only those deemed to possess a relevant or necessary skill will accumulate enough to be permitted entry. The policy, yet to be agreed, aims to end the border shambles that has seen more than four million migrants flock here in just 20 years.

The number encouraged here since Labour opened the floodgates in 1997 is equivalent to the combined populations of Birmingham, Manchester and Glasgow. Since then, net migration has averaged 214,157 a year, culminating in last year’s record of 333,000, half of which were from the EU. Leave campaigners said the ONS figures made a mockery of Prime Minister David Cameron’s pledge to slash net migration to “tens of thousands”.

Europe’s open borders exposed Britain to 550 million people, but by voting to leave none will have an automatic right to come here. In future, people from the bloc who want to work here – and vice versa – will almost certainly require permits, just like US citizens.

 Our vote to Leave gives us the chance to finally take back full control over our borders

Tory MP Philip Hollobone

Tory MP Philip Hollobone said: “Our vote to Leave gives us the chance to finally take back full control over our borders.” A lucrative life in Britain has encouraged tens of thousands to try and sneak in illegally from northern France.

A Daily Express investigation revealed there are 20,000 migrants camped out between Dunkirk and Cherbourg, waiting to slip across the Channel. More than 84,000 were intercepted at the UK border on the continental border last year – the equivalent of 230 a day or one every six minutes.

GETTY

Britain has a bilateral agreement with France over juxtaposed border controls – Le Touquet Treaty – which is entirely separate from the EU. In theory, the referendum vote will make no difference to the historic arrangement with British border controls continuing to remain on the continent, unless France makes moves to tear it up and force the border back to Dover.

One seismic change that is inevitable is the end of our obligations under Article 6 of the European Convention of Human Rights which had made Britain impotent when trying to remove illegal migrants and foreign criminals. It was human rights that led to a farcical, decade-long battle to deport radical cleric Abu Qatada.

British and European courts blocked his expulsion on the grounds evidence might be used against him that had been obtained by torture. UK taxpayers ended up footing a £1.7million legal bill to put him on a plane. The decision to leave the EU will finally take Britain outside its legal European human rights obligations.

GETTY

GETTY

Experts say the logical thing to do now would be to pave the way for the Human Rights Act to be replaced by a UK Bill of Rights. Migration Watch UK had warned of “serious consequences for population and quality of life” over the next 20 years if Britain voted to remain part of the EU, estimating as many as 4.3 million continental migrants could arrive by 2035. Ukip MEP Diane James said: “This historic result means we have finally started the process by which we take back control.

There is nothing to fear.” Yesterday David Cameron said: “I would reassure Brits living in European countries and European citizens living here there will be no immediate changes in your circumstances. “There will be no initial change in the way our people can travel, in the way our goods can move or the way our services can be sold. “We must now prepare for a negotiation with the European Union.”

