Britain's sovereignty is at stake in Thursday's EU referendum, says Peter Hill

2016-06-21

GETTY

Then it gradually became clear that the European Union was sick. What started with good intentions has become a greedy, incompetent tyranny. A self-serving elite of officials, freeloading former politicians and politically motivated judges rules the lives of 500 million people who have absolutely no influence over its decisions.

What’s at stake in Thursday’s referendum is much more than the economy or immigration, vastly important though those issues are. It is sovereignty: the power of a people to determine its affairs and future without interference.

Britain enjoyed that freedom for centuries, eventually with democratically elected parliaments, and we fought repeatedly to defend it. But freedom and democracy are new to the rest of Europe.

They didn’t arrive until after the Second World War and have never become a settled fact of life in some places. Bureaucracy is nothing new to Europeans: they are used to the idea that officials run things. We Britons have never been happy with that.

We will never like it, a fact that our Prime Minister doesn’t appear to understand. As the vote draws close many of us will be thinking hard whether we are making the right decision. Well, this could be the last chance we have to decide our own destiny.

Yes, the very last. For ever and ever. I shall be voting for Britain and freedom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

GETTY

A BUNCH of Cambridge criminologists has made a remarkable discovery: putting more bobbies on the beat could cut crime. As statements of the bleedin’ obvious go this ranks with water is wet and the Pope’s a Catholic. 

But now the country’s top brains have said it perhaps police chiefs will listen. No doubt officers enjoy rushing around in expensive cars and playing with iPads but meanwhile bad people are doing bad things and getting away with it. Only on Sunday a gang of lads armed with bolt cutters swooped on the bike rack at the corner of my street and rode off with five machines.

 In broad daylight. Not half a mile away is a police station where officers were busily filling in endless forms and reports. Yet just two community support officers – not even real coppers – on the streets would reduce crimes by 39 per cent and mean 20 per cent fewer 999 calls, according to the Cambridge experts. If ever there was a no-brainer this is it. 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

REMEMBER that excruciating scene in Casino Royale where James Bond is tied naked on to a dining chair with the seat knocked out and the villain whacks his undercarriage with a weighted rope but Bond just says he has a little itch down there and could Le Chiffre oblige?

Well it will no longer be credible because British service personnel have been ordered not to resist torture. Instead of name, rank and number they are being trained in “slow release” strategy, starting with unimportant facts and gradually spilling the lot.

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

The top brass accepts that it’s unreasonable to maintain a stiff upper lip in the face of terrorists who don’t give a toss about the Geneva Convention. “If someone starts snipping off your or your mate’s fingers you will say anything to get them to stop,” said a source.

They’d only have to tickle the soles of my feet with a feather and I’d tell them everything. qTHE longest day passed yesterday so only half of summer is left and it hasn’t even started yet. I’ve seen more longest days and shortest nights than I care to count but I can’t decide which is a day for optimism and which for pessimism.

On balance I think the shortest day is more optimistic because each day afterwards will be that little bit lighter and spring will come and then summer. Except summer sometimes doesn’t seem to come at all. Still, we must try to stay hopeful. On the other hand tomorrow will be a little darker… 

------------------------------------------------------------------------



GETTY

PRESIDENT Putin is furious that his athletes have been banned from the Rio Olympics because of persistent drug abuse and I have some sympathy with him, not about the use of drugs but because every sport in every country seems tainted. 

Illegal performance enhancing substances and treatments have been rife in snooker, tennis, football, cycling, probably darts, as well as track and field. Bridge and chess are marred by cheating. 

Competitors have sought unfair advantages since ancient Greece and before. Let him who has no sin cast the first stone, etc ... 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

BAD news for all red-blooded men: girls are being abolished. Leading headmistresses – sorry, heads – want teachers to say “pupils” or “students” instead. Choice of words is part of a “complex pastoral issue” facing schools, says Caroline Jordan, president of the Girls’ Schools Association. The what association? Surely she means the Gender Neutral Schools Association.

I feel sorry for the parents. How will they know where to send little Arthur or Martha when all indications of sex are expunged? qFOR weeks I had been searching for my grey pullover. I turned out all the drawers and cupboards, peered under beds, emptied dusty boxes, ransacked wardrobes time after time.

Was it in the car boot? No. Then I found it… in the freezer, where my wife had put it to prevent moths. And completely forgotten about it. 

