‘EU made its bed’ Buoyed by Brexit NOW Denmark politicians call for referendum

2016-06-24

GETTY/ FACEBOOK

The Danish People's Party (DPP) and the Red-Green Alliance (RGA) have renewed the demand for a vote on the Scandinavian nation’s membership of the Euro-bloc after the Leave camp’s success. 

Leader of DPP, Kristian Thulesen Dahl, said Brussels had made its bed by underestimating the looming scepticism in Europe and now the Danish people must be given a chance to follow Britain out of the EU.

The right-wing politician said: “This shows that once against the EU completely underestimates people’s scepticism. The EU has made its bed.

“I also believe Danes should of course have a referendum on whether we want to follow Britain or stay in the EU.”

Mr Dalh’s call for a Danish referendum was echoed by the RGA, as its spokeswoman Pernille Skipper said she hoped the British people’s decision to leave would trigger a reform of the EU. 

She said: “I hope Danish politicians take [Brexit] as a wake-up call. There is enormous scepticism among the population.

“Let us now have a referendum here as well.”

Earlier this month a survey found previously Brussels-loyal Danes were now increasingly ready for a referendum on their membership as turmoil continues to plague the 28-strong bloc.

Brexit: What to expect next

GETTY

 This shows that once against the EU completely underestimates people’s scepticism

Leader of DPP, Kristian Thulesen Dahl

The poll found 42 per cent of Danes wanted a public vote on the question of their nation’s membership to be held, compared to 37 per cent in February. 

It also uncovered support for the red-tape obsessed officials was plummeting with only 44 per cent of voters saying they would choose to remain if a referendum was held tomorrow, compared to 56 per cent in November last year. 

Despite the growing Euroscepticism Danish prime minister Lars Løkke Rasmussen said a referendum was not on the agenda as the country “belongs in the EU”. 

GETTY

The demand for a Danish referendum comes as far-right National Front leader Marine Le Pen called for a French vote on EU membership. 

As the final results revealed Britain could cut ties with Brussels this morning, the French politician repeated her previous calls for a “Frexit”. 

She tweeted: “Victory to liberty! As I have been demanding for many years, we now need the same referendum in France and EU countries.”

