Theresa May FINALLY becomes first Remain campaigner to call for tighter immigration laws

2016-06-16

GETTY

Rules allowing EU citizens to live and work in Britain need more controls “in the future”, the Home Secretary said.

Her comments are at odds with senior Tory Remain campaigners, with George Osborne saying the Government will not announce any plans to increase controls on EU migrants ahead of the June 23 referendum.

May’s first foray into the EU debate was pounced on by Vote Leave supporters as a sign of “deep splits” within the Remain camp.

Her remarks about immigration undermined the Remain campaign’s attempt to centre the debate on the economy and played into Brexit supporters’ hands.

GETTY

Osborne yesterday provoked a backlash from Conservative MPs by warning that he will be forced to implement an “emergency Brexit budget” with £30billion worth of cuts and tax rises for the middle classes.

The timing of her remarks will also raise questions about her own post-referendum ambitions, after the Home Secretary refused to rule out a leadership bid after David Cameron steps down.

May admitted she had been approached to join the Leave campaign and said she “completely understands” public concerns about immigration.

GETTY

GETTY

 Look, David I hope is going to carry on until 2020, there’s no vacancy

Theresa May

David Cameron’s negotiation with EU leaders has led to Britain being given the use of an “emergency brake” on migrant access to in-work benefits for four years, but this was slammed as not giving Britain enough border control.

May refused to deny she would make a bid for the Conservative leadership once Mr Cameron stands down.

Asked whether she would like to succeed Mr Cameron as Prime Minister, she said: “Look, David I hope is going to carry on until 2020, there’s no vacancy… as I said there’s no vacancy.

12 reasons why you should vote IN or OUT of EU

She said: “There are some changes coming up in free movement rules, we should look at further reform in the future.”

But she went on to say there was no “silver bullet” on immigration.

May said: “There’s no one thing you can do to suddenly deal with all the problems and concerns with immigration and that includes leaving the EU.”

GETTY

A Downing Street source denied that there is a split between May and Osborne.

A spokesperson said: “The Prime Minister has always said the process of reform continues after the June 23. Theresa May was right to refer to this as an ongoing process.”

