James Corden gives impassioned speech to REMAIN in the EU on The Late Late show

2016-06-23

Taking time out from his signature comical style of chat, the 37-year-old delivered an impassioned plea on the eve before Brits take to the polling station to make the biggest decision this generation has ever faced.

The popular host admitted that while he doesn't usually get political in public, he felt a strong urge to voice his opinion. 

"I'm not one to usually get very political," he said. "But I really hope we all vote to remain in the EU. It will be better for our economy, better for our industry, and better for our international relations."

He continued: "But mostly because it represents so much more than that.



CBS

Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), makes a statement after Britain voted to leave on the European Union

 I really hope we all vote to remain in the EU

James Corden

"In today's world, barriers should be going down, not going up. Our show plays in 135 countries - I don't even think I can name 135 countries.

"Wherever someone was born, we can share the same jokes and stories and interests. Ultimately, we are all in this together. I hope the people of Britain go out and vote remain."

His comments come after the Beckhams both pledged their allegiance to the remain camp, while Simon Cowell, Benedict Cumberbatch and Sir Richard Branson have all declared they'll also be voting to stay in the European Union. 

Elsewhere, Liz Hurley, 51, stripped off with nothing but a Union Jack cushion to cover her modesty to declare she was pro-Brexit. 





 Every voice matters. Vote tomorrow- whatever your persuasion. I'm voting #Brexit #voteleave No gloating from the winners- no whinging from the losers VOTE!! ????????????????????????????????????

A photo posted by Elizabeth Hurley (@elizabethhurley1) on Jun 22, 2016 at 6:03am PDT

The actress captioned the picture: "Every voice matters. Vote tomorrow- whatever your persuasion. I'm voting #Brexit #voteleave No gloating from the winners- no whinging from the losers VOTE!!"

Unsurprisingly, her saucy snap sparked a huge reaction on Instagram - mainly positive. 

"Good Lord Liz. Whilst I'm #BrExit for the facts, that sure as hell is one big persuasion right there," one person wrote, while another added: "Wowww looking absolutely stunning damn." 

 I'm passionate about my country and whatever the result of Thursday's referendum, we will always be Great.  Each side has the right to their opinion and that should always be respected whatever the outcome of the European Referendum. I played my best years at my boyhood club, Manchester United.  I grew up with a core group of young British players that included Ryan Giggs, Paul Scholes, Nicky Butt and the Neville Brothers.  Added to that was an experienced group of older British players such as Gary Pallister, Steve Bruce and Paul Ince. Now that team might have gone on to win trophies but we were a better and more successful team because of a Danish goalkeeper, Peter Schmeichel, the leadership of an Irishman Roy Keane and the skill of a Frenchman in Eric Cantona. I was also privileged to play and live in Madrid, Milan and Paris with teammates from all around Europe and the world. Those great European cities and their passionate fans welcomed me and my family and gave us the opportunity to enjoy their unique and inspiring cultures and people. We live in a vibrant and connected world where together as a people we are strong.  For our children and their children we should be facing the problems of the world together and not alone. For these reasons I am voting to Remain

A photo posted by David Beckham (@davidbeckham) on Jun 21, 2016 at 12:15am PDT

Other stars who will join Liz in voting out in the referendum include Sir Michael Caine and Dame Joan Collins. 

Explaining his desire to leave, veteran actor Michael said recently: "Unless there is some extremely significant change, we should get out. You cannot be dictated to by thousands of faceless civil servants."

Actress and author Dame Joan has been vocal about her 'out' vote on social media and just hours ago urged her followers to quit the EU.

"Don't forget to vote," she enthused, before aptly adding: "OUT!!!"

