Queen’s experience will help Cameron through his final days as Prime Minister

2016-06-24

GETTY

At 90, after 64 years on the throne, the world’s most senior stateswoman is prepared to offer the PM the benefit of her considerable experience in how to best steer his way through the delicate negotiations that lie ahead with Britain’s European partners.

As a constitutional monarch, she is expected to act on the advice of her government and cannot tell ministers what to do.

But by convention she has the right to be consulted, advise, encourage and warn her prime minister at their weekly meetings.

It is also part of the role of the monarchy to provide stability and continuity.

Mr Cameron rang the Queen before 8am today to tell her of his decision to resign and make way for a successor by the autumn.

They subsequently met for 40 minutes at Buckingham Palace from 10.30am.

Her Majesty, who is expected to be at Windsor Castle over the weekend, before going on an official visit to Northern Ireland for two days, stands ready to offer Mr Cameron the benefit of her many years of experience supporting 12 prime ministers.

“Whenever the Queen meets the Prime Minister she is in a position to exercise that role and [Mr Cameron] is in a position to take advice of the Queen’s experience,” a senior aide said.

GETTY

GETTY

 Mr Cameron rang the Queen before 8am today to tell her of his decision to resign

But some people think that the Queen may have helped sway the vote towards Brexit, amid claims that she had told MPs: “I don’t understand Europe” and had asked dinner guests: “Give me three good reasons why Britain should be part of Europe.”

In March, one newspaper ran a story claiming the Queen backed Brexit and cited what it called her Eurosceptic views.

Although the press regulator Ipso found in May that the headline was misleading, the story had resonated with the public.

Earlier this week, the Queen’s biographer, Robert Lacey, told the Daily Express that her Majesty was a Eurosceptic, after revealing that she had asked dinner party guests to give her three good reasons to stay in Europe.

Brexit: What to expect next

GETTY

Joe Little, managing editor of Majesty magazine, suggested that the Queen’s comment may have been nothing more than an ice-breaker to get her tonguetied guests talking.

“Did it influence voters? Hard to say, but coming as it did so soon after the ‘Queen backs Brexit’ splash in a red-top newspaper, the seed may nevertheless have been sown in the minds of some of Her Majesty’s electorate,” said Mr Little.

“Was that her intention? Unlikely.”

