Household energy bills should be SLASHED post-Brexit, says consumer expert

2016-06-24

PA

The former Mayor of London made the pledge to scrap the five per cent tax on fuel bills, along with fellow Leave campaigners Michael Gove and Gisela Stuart during the campaign.

Mr Johnson's comments were made after Energy Secretary Amber Rudd and the Remain campaign team warned consumer bills would rise if the UK quit Europe.

The Leave team’s statement said: “The least wealthy are hit particularly hard. The poorest households spend three times more of their income on household energy bills than the richest households spend. 

“As long as we are in the EU, we are not allowed to cut this tax.

“When we Vote Leave, we will be able to scrap this unfair and damaging tax. It isn’t right that unelected bureaucrats in Brussels impose taxes on the poorest and elected British politicians can do nothing.”

PA

Will Hodson, co-founder of TheBigDeal.com which negotiates better deals on consumer bills is encouraging Johnson to fulfil his promise. He said: "Vote Leave promised to cut energy bills if we left the European Union. 

“If Boris Johnson is to be our next prime minister, he must keep that promise and we want his reassurance.

"Removing VAT from energy bills would put £60 back in people's pockets at a time of real uncertainty."

The chief of the consumer collective, who claims to have saved households £10million since launching in March 2014, believes Johnson's decision is essential after the Competition and Markets Authority "backed out of any serious action" against energy firms who overcharged consumers in reforms to the energy sector.



PA

In the wake of the Brexit vote there were warnings energy bills were likely to rise.

Richard Black, director of the Energy and Climate Intelligence Unit (ECIU), said: "Leaving the EU is likely to put an upwards pressure on energy bills, partly due to the direct financial costs of Brexit and also the impact of reduced investor confidence.

"So an immediate challenge for the Government following this vote will be to prevent bills rising.

"Affordability and security of supply have been enhanced by our increasing gas and electricity connections with the EU.

"A choice for the Government now is whether it wants to continue expanding those connections and hence the benefits to hard-working British families, or to shut up shop."

Mrs Rudd has claimed that leaving the EU could increase energy bills by £500m per annum by the 2020s.

