Migrants from "Europe" caught sneaking into UK - as Remain camp's immigration case crashes

2016-06-16

SWNS

Police intercepted the eight adults and three children in Essex yesterday who said they were from "Europe", when asked where they were from after a shopper heard them tapping from inside the lorry.

The new load of migrant arrivals came as the Tory's European Union (EU) Referendum Remain campaign was accused of being in a shambles over its border control policy.

Yesterday George Osborne said there would be no change to EU rules on freedom of movement, but hours later Theresa May said changes are needed.

 There's no silver bullet, there's no one thing you can do that is suddenly going to deal with all the problems and concerns people have with immigration

Theresa May

The Brexit camp received a boost after it said the Home Secretary had blown a massive hole in the case to remain in the EU as Mrs May had all but admitted David Cameron's renegotiation with Brussels last summer was inadequate.

Under EU rules, 500million EU citizens can freely cross British borders to live and work.

SWNS

But following Mr Osborne's unveiling of a so-called "emergency Budget" yesterday which he said would be needed if Britons voted to leave on June 23, the Tory party appeared to be turning in on itself.

Conservative Brexit campaigner Michael Gove headed up a group of more than 65 MPs who quickly came out to say the plan for £30billion in tax rises and spending cuts would never be implemented.

Senior Tories said the Chancellor's credibility was in shreds and his career finished following the move, whatever the referendum result is in a week's time.

Iain Duncan Smith branded Mr Osborne as behaving "more irresponsibly" than any chancellor in British history.

Many fellow Conservatives said his position was becoming untenable.

Getty

PA

Following days of silence from Mrs May, the Home Secretary called for curbs on the free movement of people from the EU during a television interview.

She said leaving the EU was not the "single answer" to addressing public concern about mass immigration.

And she said Mr Cameron's EU migrant welfare benefit reforms did not go far enough.

She told the BBC: "There's no silver bullet, there's no one thing you can do that is suddenly going to deal with all the problems and concerns people have with immigration - and that includes leaving the EU, that's not the single answer to this issue.

"There are some changes coming up in free movement rules - we should look at further reform in the future."



However, Mr Osborne said there would be no changes to the free movement laws.

He added: "We have a plan. And the plan is to restrict the welfare that people get when they come to this country."

Mr Cameron's office denied any friction with Mrs May, saying: "Reform of freedom of movement is under way in relation to criminals, sham marriages and access to welfare.

"The Prime Minister has always said the process of reform continues after June 23. Theresa May was right to refer to this as an ongoing process."

In another blow for the Remain camp yesterday, the European Commission announced Turkey's application to join the bloc was being "accelerated", despite Mr Cameron assuring the nation Turkey would not be able to join for decades.

Party infighting was not restricted to the Conservative Party, with Labour MPs running into their third day of being unable to agree on the need for tighter immigration controls.

Remainers, Gordon Brown and Neil Kinnock warned leaving the EU would turn the north of England into a "wasteland".

Their anger came as both sides of the campaign were locked in a battle of the Thames as they exchanged angry words while sailing up the river from Kent to the Houses of Parliament where MPs were engaged in Prime Minister's Questions.

