Alastair Campbell: I always thought it was a bad idea to have this referendum

2016-06-24

The Remain campaigner has been branded as “arrogant” on Twitter for arguing the referendum should never have been called.

Speaking to the BBC he said: "I don't think this referendum has just been about Europe and the EU.

"I think a lot of the people who have been turning against the EU in this debate, particularly in what are seen as traditional Labour areas, are people who just feel the financial crisis happened and the people who caused it got away with it and they didn't. 

"They feel there's too much division, too much inequality that all they've had from this Government who talk about this great economic miracle is actually austerity, austerity, austerity, and they're basically saying two fingers to the lot of you."

He added: "This referendum has unleashed all sorts of stuff. It is why I always thought it was a bad idea to have it."

His remarks about a divided country echoed those made by Shadow Home Secretary Andy Burnham in Manchester, where the final result will be announced.

Mr Burnham told Express.co.uk: "The infighting in the Tory party dominated the media and it became a drama of the Tory party and that was shown on the doorstep.

BBC

 This referendum has unleashed all sorts of stuff. It is why I always thought it was a bad idea to have it

Alastair Campbell

"Looking at the results coming in there’s clearly a lot of Labour supporters in Sunderland who have voted to leave and my message to them and to Labour supporters across the country is, we have heard you.

"We understand what you have said and this referendum has shown how we need to look at the freedom of movement."

Steve Baker, Conservative MP for Wycombe, speaking at Manchester Town Hall, said he was "fairly confident" the Leave campaign would win.

"I think I can stand here with hope in my heart that we will secure a leave vote and take back control of our country," he said.

Mr Baker insisted it would be best for Britain for Mr Cameron to continue as Prime Minister "whatever the result is".

As the odds of a Brexit dramatically shortened following wins in the north-east, the value of the pound plummeted.

