SNP MP: Independent Scotland 'might ditch the pound for the Euro' after Brexit vote

2016-06-21

GETTY

Joanna Cherry, justice spokeswoman at Westminster, said a decision on using the troubled currency would hinge on economic conditions.

Ms Cherry's remarks during a TV showdown put her at odds with leader Nicola Sturgeon, who has said a breakaway Scotland would use the pound.

 We probably wouldn't want to be tied to the pound if it nosedives after a Brexit

Joanna Cherry, justice spokeswoman

The First Minister has warned a Brexit vote on Thursday could trigger a second ballot on separation to "protect our membership of the EU".

Failing to lay out a convincing case on currency was seen as a big flaw in the Yes campaign in 2014.

But Ms Cherry, making the Remain case alongside Scottish Labour leader Kezia Dugdale, suggested Scotland could join the eurozone.

During a BBC Scotland debate she said: "We would have to look at the situation at the time. We would need to look a the economic conditions.

"We probably wouldn't want to be tied to the pound if it nosedives after a Brexit."

GETTY

Ms Cherry clashed with SNP veteran Jim Sillars and Tory grandee Lord Forsyth, both campaigning for a Leave vote.

Mr Sillars, former deputy leader of the party, branded the prospect of another independence referendum "kidology", insisting Ms Sturgeon had failed to secure a mandate in the Holyrood's election.

Former Scottish Secretary and Vote Leave board member Lord Forsyth said: "I think it is a disgrace that the SNP continue to damage Scotland's interests by continuing to drag out this idea we could leave the United Kingdom. And if we were to leave the United Kingdom with the oil price where it is we would be bust.

"The EU wouldn't have you. You wouldn't be able to meet the debt criteria."

Ms Cherry insisted there would be a groundswell of support if Scotland was taken out of the EU against the majority of Scots' wishes.

She said an independent Scotland's deficit would be £7billion to £8billion compared to the UK's £76billion.



She added: "Most countries in western Europe have a deficit. An independent Scotland would have a small deficit.

"It is simply ridiculous to think an independent Scotland would not be welcome in the EU."

The debate also exposed splits within the Leave camp with Mr Sillars attacking Ukip ledaer Nigel Farage. 

He said: "We are not Nigel Farages, let me tell you. I think if the Leave side loses on Thursday he will be primarily responsible for the disgraceful way he has conducted the argument on immigration.

Earlier, Ms Dugdale claimed the economic shock of Brexit would be seen "almost instantly" as markets opened on Friday morning if there was a Leave vote.

But Lord Forsyth said: "Despite all the scaremongering, if you look at the markets today the pound is broadly where it was before the referendum was announced."

Mr Sillars said it would be "lunacy" for the EU to put up trade barriers with the world's fifth largest economy.

