'It is NOT democracy' PM's former adviser continues to hammer him over immigration

2016-06-21

Mr Hilton, who is campaigning for Brexit, insists Mr Cameron was directly and explicitly told in 2012 his migration manifesto pledge would fail.

"We were told, directly and explicitly, that it was impossible for the Government to meet its immigration target as long as we remained members of the EU, which of course insists on the free movement of people within it," he wrote in the Daily Mail.

Government sources have since questioned Mr Hilton’s recollections of the event.

"What else would you expect them to say?" Mr Hilton joked when speaking to the BBC’s World at One programme.

"I remember it so clearly because it struck me that we were in this ludicrous situation of looking for ways to harm our own economy.

GETTY

 It really isn’t about individuals. It is about the principles in which we run our affairs in this country

Steve Hilton

"That’s why this argument about immigration is part of the argument, not just about the economy, but about everything that we need to do to boost people’s living standards.

"And bring about the kind of life that we want people to lead in a government that people elect and is free to do the things people want in this country."

Mr Hilton dodged a question about whether the prime minister has ever directly told him he wanted to leave the EU – saying he did not want to make things personal.

He continued: "It really isn’t about individuals. It is about the principles in which we run our affairs in this country.

"Whether he is prime minister or anyone else. The fact is that as long as we are in the EU the government that people elect in this country is not able to do the things it needs to do to boost the economy and improve living standards and build a stronger society.

"It all ends up being a horse trading negotiation with 27 other countries and that is not democracy.

"And that is why I think we need to leave the EU."

Responding to his former adviser’s claims, Mr Cameron said migration can be controlled from within the EU by limiting the availability of benefits to those recently arrived in the country.

