Osborne finally breaks silence as politicians call for him to resign for EU scaremongering

2016-06-24

GETTY

This comes as a senior Eurosceptic said that it was "not important" that Osborne stays in Government. 

Tory MP and prominent Vote Leave campaigner Steve Baker said last night it was critical that David Cameron continued as Prime Minister but it was not as "equally important" that Osborne stayed on as Chancellor.

He said: “What is best for the country is that after this result in the morning, whatever the result, is that David Cameron is in place to begin carrying it through.”

MEP Jane Collins said: “What is evident from these results is that the working men and women of this country were not represented by the main parties but did not believe the relentless scaremongering by Project Fear.

“I also firmly believe that George Osborne, who has spent the last months deriding the British economy and British workers, can no longer stay in position as Chancellor. He used tax payers money to create bizarre economic models to bamboozle voters. 

“The establishment elite patronised the people of this country and treated them like idiots and they have responded with the message that they don't want to be ruled by Brussels or people who think so little of their abilities as the remain camp clearly did.”

REUTERS

 But when quizzed over the fate of Mr Osborne, anti-EU Baker added: “I don’t think it’s equally important, no.

"But it is a matter for the Prime Minister it’s not a matter for backbenchers."

Mr Osborne said on Twitter today: “It was a hard fought campaign. It is not the outcome I wanted but I respect decision of British people and will do all I can to make it work”.

Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), makes a statement after Britain voted to leave on the European Union

Osborne, 45, campaigned alongside David Cameron for Britain to remain in the EU.

 And yesterday's vote saw the public go against opinion polls which predicted a narrow Remain victory.

With less than 60 constituencies yet to declare, Britain has voted to in favour of a Brexit.

