British car industry will 'thrive' outside EU, say Leave campaigners

2016-06-22

GETTY

The “hugely successful” car industry will “thrive” in the aftermath of a vote to quit the Brussels club, say leading Eurosceptic economists and politicians.

A Brexit would boost British exports, the head of supercar firm Aston Martin has told his staff, despite the Remain camp's claims that a vote to leave would put British jobs at risks.

Aston Martin chief executive Andy Palmer told the firm’s 1,800 UK staff that Brexit’s potential “negative effect on UK GDP growth… if likely to be offset in part by the depreciation in the pound making our exports more competitive”.

Mr Palmer's statement rubbishes Ford, Jaguar Land Rover, BMW, Vauxhall and Toyota's claims that Britain leaving the EU would lead to a damaging period of uncertainty.

Their remarks have been backed by pro-EU Prime Minister David Cameron, who tweeted: "The UK car industry is clear - we should remain in the EU for a strong economy."

But the Leave camp argue that Britain’s car manufacturers have little to fear from Brexit.

GETTY

GETTY

Economists for Brexit's Professor Patrick Minford said: "The British car industry is hugely successful and has competed with all comers in the world.

"I don’t see why it can’t thrive outside the EU. The Germans and the French will be desperate to do a trade deal with us because the UK is such a key market."

Former British Chambers of Commerce director general John Longworth told BBC Radio 4 earlier this week that British-produced cars would become more popular if the EU slapped tariffs on imports from UK manufactures.

He said: "German cars would become a little bit more expensive, we would buy a few less and would end up buying more British-produced cars."

Mr Longworth's assertion undermines that of Mike Hawes, chief executive of the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, who claimed leaving the EU would “jeopardise” the future of the successful industry, which is the source of 800,000 British jobs.

