Defiant Cameron says he WILL remain as PM after referendum - even if we vote for Brexit

2016-06-18

GETTY

The Prime Minister said the result of Thursday's ballot was "not a verdict on me" and insisted he was the best person to lead negotiations with Europe in the result of a Leave victory. 

Having won the 2015 General Election on a manifesto that promised a referendum on Europe, Mr Cameron told the Times Magazine he felt responsible for the outcome.

Citing his "strong relationships" within Europe, he said: "I just get on with the job.

"I have a very clear mandate from the British people to serve as Prime Minister in a Conservative Government, delivering a referendum." 



There has been speculation Mr Cameron will face a leadership challenge regardless of the referendum result, with the Conservative Party embroiled in a so-called "blue-on-blue" battle between Pro-EU Tories and Brexiters.

Meanwhile BMG Research has found 58 per cent of voters believe Mr Cameron should resign if Britain votes to quit.

But asked whether he could stay in his post in the event of Brexit, he said: "Yes. 

"I think it's very important that the individual careers of individual politicians don't get caught up in this question."



GETTY

 I think it's very important that the individual careers of individual politicians don't get caught up in this question

David Cameron on his future after the referendum

He added: "It won't be a verdict on me, whatever the outcome is. It's a verdict on the question, but I do care a lot about the question."

Earlier this month David Davis, the former Conservative shadow home secretary who once challenged Mr Cameron for the party leadership, said calls by rebel Tories for a vote of no confidence in the PM were "unhelpful and an unnecessary distraction”.

GETTY

His intervention came after senior Tory Eurosceptics including Nadine Dorries, Andrew Bridgent and Sir Bill Cash criticised Mr Cameron's campaigning for Remain.

Mr Bridgen said: “David Cameron has placed himself front and centre of a disingenuous Remain campaign, setting himself at odds with half of the Parliamentary Party and 70 per cent of our members and activists on the most important issue facing our Country in a generation.

“Whatever the result, I believe his position will be untenable.”



