'We can have referendum like UK' Turkey says EU doesn't like it as it's 'majority-Muslim'

2016-06-23

GETTY

Recep Tayyip Erdogan says the EU doesn't want Turkey to join the 28-member bloc because it's a "Muslim-majority country" and he is now considering holding a referendum on whether to continue with efforts to join the bloc. 

Angrily lashing out at the EU’s treatment of Ankara, the Turkish leader said: "We can stand up and ask the people just like the British are doing.

"We would ask: 'Do we continue the negotiations with the EU or do we end it?'

"If the people say 'continue', then we would carry on." 

Turkey first applied for associate membership in 1963, signing an agreement aiming for its accession into the EU. 

Ankara formally applied for membership in 1987 and began accession talks in 2005.

 We can stand up and ask the people just like the British are doing

Recep Tayyip Erdogan

But progress has been extremely slow, with Turkey far from reaching the 72 required benchmarks for EU membership. 

Speaking yesterday, Mr Erdogan asked the EU: "Why are you stalling?"

In the build up to Britain's referendum on its EU membership, Vote Leave campaigners have warned millions of Turks would come to the UK if it stayed in the bloc. 

But David Cameron has refuted this argument, saying Turkey joining the EU is "not remotely on the cards". 

GETTY

The Prime Minister, who has previously backed Ankara joining the union, said Turkey would probably not be ready to join the bloc "until the year 3000" on its current rate of progress. 

His comments have greatly angered Ankara, with Mr Erdogan's chief advisor accusing Mr Cameron of deserting Turkey in its quest to join the EU. 

Chief presidential adviser ?lnur Çevik said Mr Cameron's apparent U-turn had left his country "flabbergasted". 

Mr Çevik said: “We thought that Mr Cameron was our chief supporter in our quest for European Union membership.

“We are really, really flabbergasted, let’s put it that way.

“Turks felt that the British were the driving force behind our EU membership and that they were driving us right to the hilt.

“The way Mr Cameron put it, we feel really, really taken in. The way he’s saying it, ‘they were never going to get in anyway, we just said we’ll go along with them’, that kind of attitude is deeply hurting the Turks.”

Officials from the EU and Turkey are due to meet on June 30 to officially extend Ankara's negotiations to join the European club.

EU diplomats confirmed lower-level officials would meet to open a series of talks on "financial and budgetary provisions" that Turkey must meet to become a member.

