EU's secret Brexit weapon: The one Euro official sent to UK to persuade Britons to STAY

2016-06-18

Getty

Phil Hogan has been allowed to tour Britain, despite David Cameron making European Commissioner Jean-Claude Juncker promise him and his team would not make any serious decisions ahead of the referendum next Thursday, according to Politico.

The European agriculture commissioner has quietly been attempting to get farmers on the EU’s side in a series of visits across the entire UK.

Polls have shown farmers are largely in favour of leaving the EU to get away from tariffs and reams of red tape they have to deal with.

 UK farmers are better off within the CAP

Phil Hogan

In an exclusive interview with Express.co.uk, Britain’s farming minister, George Eustice revealed why he is backing Brexit, despite the secretary of state for farming, Liz Truss, coming out in favour of remaining.

He said Brexit would cut red tape and send subsidies to areas of need, rather than already wealthy landowners.

He suggested a Canadian-style system where farmers are supported by an insurance system so they can be subsidised during catastrophe.

EU

But, in an attempt to get voters on the EU’s side, Mr Hogan has attended several events, including giving the respected Gibson Lecture at Queen’s University Belfast on Europe Day (May 9).

In a bid to entice farmers to vote to remain, he revealed the EU’s research and innovation budget would increase by €30billion up to €80bn by 2020.

The former Irish farmer and known tough politician also said how he believed the controversial Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) is integral to farmers’ survival, despite many despairing of the policy.

He told the audience in Belfast: “There is no comparable agricultural policy scheme on this planet, either existing or hypothetical, than can continue to deliver for the farmers, rural communities and citizens of Northern Ireland better than the CAP.”

Mr Hogan also joined Ms Truss on the campaign trail as well as attending several farming conferences across the UK.

While neither Mr Juncker or First Vice-President Frans Timmermans visited the UK this year, Mr Hogan appears to have had free reign of the UK during the Brexit period.

However, he maintains his visits have been practical and moderate.

On his EU website blog, Mr Hogan said he “received invitations” to speak in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland to “contribute” to the referendum debate.

He said he would not be telling people how to vote, although the Commission wants the UK to remain in the EU.

EU

Getty

Mr Hogan said: “UK farmers are better off within the CAP, and that being a member of the EU strengthens UK agri-trade and food security.

“Some published plans describe a post-Brexit British Agricultural Policy of £2bn per year – this would be a third less than the £3bn received from the CAP this year, and indeed every year up to 2020.”

But Brexit campaigners are not convinced of his “moderate” views.

Ukip MEP Stuart Agnew, said: “They’ve seized on Hogan because he could pass for British.

“He’s seen as somebody who communicates and can call a spade a spade.”

A Remain campaigner, speaking at Mr Hogan’s speech in Oxford, said: “The Irish are perhaps the only nationality other than the Dutch who could get away with campaigning here.”

