'Nothing was meant to change' Viewers panic as This Morning cancelled for Brexit coverage

2016-06-24

ITV

This Morning posted on its Twitter feed about the cancellation, saying: “As Britain has voted to leave the European Union ITV will be replacing @itvthismorning with continuous news coverage of the historic vote.”

While the Loose Women account tweeted: “Due to the #Brexit vote, @ITV will be airing rolling news coverage this morning and there will be no live Loose Women today.” 

However, fans of the daytime programmes were far from pleased by the news and took to social media to share their anger about the decision. 

ITV

One person posted on the micro-blogging site: “@itvthismorning uh I was so looking forward this morning.”

“No way!! What's the country coming to! Taking @itvthismorning off air - it's started... #Armageddon,” said a shocked viewer.

Another person lamented: “@itvthismorning no break from the misery of this awful news then?”

As Britain has voted to leave the European Union ITV will be replacing @itvthismorning with continuous news coverage of the historic vote.

Due to the #Brexit vote, @ITV will be airing rolling news coverage this morning and there will be no live Loose Women today.

ITV

 As Britain has voted to leave the European Union ITV will be replacing @itvthismorning with continuous news coverage of the historic vote

This Morning Twitter account

Someone else said: “@loosewomen @ITV Shame, I would have loved to have heard what you girls had to say on it!!!! Feisty!!”

A Loose Women person said: “@loosewomen @ITV well I definitely did not vote for that!!”

The news came not longer after Good Morning Britain was uncermoniously pulled from the air as ITV News started airing.

Today, it was announced that the UK had decided to leave the UK after 51.9 per cent voted to leave the EU compared to 48.1 per who wanted to stay. 

ITV

No way!! What's the country coming to! Taking @itvthismorning off air - it's started... #Armageddon

@itvthismorning uh I was so looking forward this morning

@itvthismorning no break from the misery of this awful news then? :(

@itvthismorning no I love watching The show on my day off

@loosewomen @ITV Shame, I would have loved to have heard what you girls had to say on it!!!! Feisty!!

Brexit: What to expect next

Since the results were announced Prime Minister David Cameron has announced that he is stepping down and that his replacement will be appointed by October.

This Morning is on ITV weekdays at 10.30am and Loose Women is only daily at 12.30pm.

