Petition calling to cancel EU referendum surges in support in wake of Jo Cox murder

2016-06-19

GETTY • PA

By Saturday more than 20,000 people had signed the petition on the Parliament website calling for the historic vote to be called off at the last minute. 

So far more than 44,000 people have signed the petition. 

The call comes amid criticism of the tone of the EU referendum campaign and also the temporary suspension of activities by both Leave and Remain camps out of respect for Mrs Cox. 

The popular pro-EU Labour MP for Batley and Spen was shot and stabbed by her attacker in her constituency last Thursday. 

Thomas Mair, the man charged with the mother-of-two’s murder, gave his name as “Death to traitors, freedom for Britain” when he appeared in court on Saturday morning. 

The petition has surpassed the 10,000 signatures needed to prompt an official response from the Government. 

IG

 We cannot let such a sickening attack on our democracy kill our democracy

If the current rate of signatures continues, the petition looks set to hit 100,000 on polling day on June 23 - the number needed to trigger a debate in Parliament. 

The petition gained a surge in support after people started sharing it on social media. 

Many people both for and against cancelling the referendum have taken to Twitter to voice their opinions. 

One Vote Leave supporter said: “We cannot let such a sickening attack on our democracy kill our democracy. The vote must proceed.” 

We cannot let such a sickening attack on our democracy kill our democracy. The vote must proceed. https://t.co/zuLus10v4Q

Another Twitter user posted: “Just signed petition to cancel the EU referendum which makes sense to me following the death of Jo Cox.” 

Others said cancelling the referendum would be the “death of democracy” and called the petition’s surge in support after the MP’s killing as “shameful”. 

But the petition is unlikely to cause much of a stir as MPs have broken for recess ahead of the referendum and will be unable to hold a debate.

Parliament is being recalled next week in order to give MPs the chance to pay tribute to Mrs Cox - but it is highly unlikely the petitions committee will consider the online petition in time for the referendum. 

GETTY

With just four days to go until Britons head to the polls campaigning has resumed after being suspended after Mrs Cox’s death. 

Petitioners argued Britain is a parliamentary democracy and that parliament - not the public - should decide whether Britain stays in the EU. 

The petition said 444 out of the UK’s 650 MPs have declared their support for Britain staying a member of the EU represented “a rare and overwhelming cross-party Parliamentary majority”. 

The petition says: “If it is the settled will of such a large majority in the House of Commons, Parliament should now rise to the occasion and assert the very sovereignty Brexit campaigners claim it has lost. 

“Parliament should ratify the agreement reached by the Government with the European Union and confirm Britain’s membership of the European Union on that basis.” 

GETTY

The polls released over the weekend remain largely split after a series of surveys indicated a surge in support for Vote Leave.

