Brexit: What will happen to travel when Britain leaves the EU?

2016-06-24

PA

Brexit campaigners have rejected the Prime Minister’s claims that an eight-night holiday for four to Europe could rise by £230 if Britain votes to leave the EU.

The value of the pound has tumbled in the wake of the vote and David Cameron has claimed that the cost of trips overseas would rise in the event of Brexit. 

Mr Cameron said: “On top of the immediate effects of a weaker pound on the real-world cost of goods and services for those travelling abroad, there could also be a impacts on other arrangements that have benefitted British holidaymakers if the UK were to leave the EU.”

Vote Leave chief executive Matthew Elliott said: “It’s remarkable to see the Prime Minister talking down our country and our economy day after day.

"These threats lack credibility – the pound has actually been stable in recent months as the possibility of Brexit has increased. 

“The truth is that leaving the EU will liberate the UK and allow us to do trade deals with countries like India and China – helping our economy to grow.”

Here is a look at what Brexit would mean for the many millions of holidaymakers who travel to Europe every year.

AFP Getty

The Treasury has argued the pound will weaken - leading to higher travel costs - now the British people have voted to quit the EU. 

But Vote Leave dismissed the claims and said there was no evidence that the cost of holidays would rise in the event of Brexit.

A Leave.EU spokesman also hit back at Mr Cameron by saying that currencies fall and rise all the time regardless of referendums. 

He said: “We can expect some destinations to become cheaper and some dearer – just as they normally do and have always done! 

“What we also can expect is for sterling to eventually appreciate as the UK becomes more prosperous outside the EU meaning more buying power in EU countries and non-EU countries.” 

But Association of British Travel Agents (ABTA) chief executive Mark Tanzer warned that Brexit could lead to uncertainty and higher travel costs for businesspeople and holidaymakers. 

From a travel perspective, he said: “Our view is that the potential risks and downsides are not matched by an equal upside for the traveller.

"We recognise that people will approach this referendum by considering many factors – personal, professional, and economic – before casting their vote."

Getty

Vote Leave argued that Brexit would not increase the price of flights and called for Britain to “take back control of aviation policy”. 

But easyJet chief executive Carolyn McCall said the EU had created a common aviation area which allows any European airline to fly anywhere in Europe. 

Ms McCall said: “This has kept all airlines’ costs low and has enabled low fares airlines like easyJet to expand. If the UK were to vote to leave the EU any new, more restrictive aviation arrangements would add cost and therefore fares would rise.”



Pros and cons of Brexit

If Britain leaves the EU, the impact on airfares would depend on the negotiations to secure access to the EU aviation market. 

Last week Ryanair boss Michael O'Leary said Brexit would be "absolutely crazy” despite having once described the European Commission as an "evil empire".

In 2011 he said: "The European Union spends most of its time either suing me, torturing me, criticising me or condemning me for lowering the cost of air travel all over Europe and making life really difficult for their favourite airlines."

The Government said British holidaymakers could risk losing access to free healthcare in Europe if the UK votes to leave the EU. 

Holidaymakers currently have access to free medical cover in the EU through the European Health Insurance Card (EHIC). 

If Britain votes to leave the EU, the country would have to renegotiate access to healthcare in Europe. 

ABTA said EU regulations currently allow holidaymakers to benefit from financial protection for package holidays and compensation for flight delays.

Mr Tanzer said: “If we came out we’d either want to replace those or to find another way to make sure we were protected against costs when we were travelling."



Vodafone Group chief executive Vittorio Colao said the EU has driven the campaign to end to roaming charges across the EU from June 2017.  

He said: “Britain will benefit from being part of a borderless European single digital market as it will create new opportunities for economic growth. 

“Consequently, we believe it is better to be a shaper and leader from within, rather than being just a commercial neighbour.” 

BT Group chief executive Gavin Patterson said they have been able to offer lower roaming and data charges thanks to Britain’s EU membership.

Mr Patterson said: “Voters need to think very carefully before turning their backs on an institution that helps to ensure benefits like that are delivered.”

WHAT WILL HAPPEN TO EXPATS WHEN BRITAIN LEAVES THE EU? 



