'We can become a beacon for the WHOLE world' Michael Gove's patriotic closing speech on QT

2016-06-16

The Tory MP asked every single Briton to "believe in their country" ahead of the referendum a week from today.

The stirring remarks came during a special Brexit edition of Question Time.

Mr Gove, who broke ranks with his long-time friend the prime minister to campaign for Leave, fielded a number of unseen questions from the audience, ranging from concerns over the post-Brexit economy to when the country might see migration fall. 

However, it was the politician's closing remarks that sparked massive applause and a widespread social media reaction.

He said: “If we vote Leave we’ll be affirming our faith in democracy.

"We’ll also be sending a message to those leading Europe for the past ten years who have been running every European country into the ground.

BBC

 Britain can be a progressive beacon for the whole world

Michael Gove

"To those in charge of the single currency: you’re wrong, change direction.

"We believe Britain is stronger, freer, fairer and can be a progressive beacon for the whole world".

During the debate, he hit out at the Remain campaign for "ramping up the fear, turning it up to 11".

GETTY

He also insisted Turkey would "inevitably" join the EU in his lifetime – unless Britain stood up and voted out.

Mr Gove complained Britain was "spending millions" to hasten Turkey's accession, just by its membership of the EU.

The rebel MP also discussed a Bank of England report which showed wages were being crushed by the influx of immigration. 

Social media responded to Mr Gove's performance with high praise. 



BBC

One Twitter user said: "He was great, answered every question with the truth as I see it he is a very clever and sincere."

Another user on YouTube added:  "I am voting leave because that will give hope to the Greeks who are being occupied by the EU. 

"Even in countries like France polls say people want a referendum. 

"It's a vote for the UK, but also for the people of Europe."

