Cameron's SECRET battleplan to stay in Number 10: PM warned narrow lead could trigger coup

2016-06-19

GETTY

The Prime Minister’s closest aides are drawing up a raft of new policy announcements as part of a secret battle plan aimed at keeping him in power. 

A “rescue reshuffle” which will see key members of the Leave campaign promoted is also expected to take place as the PM attempts to unite warring factions within his party. 

It comes amid claims he could face a leadership challenge within hours of Thursday’s poll, irrespective of the result, with a number of backbench MPs poised to submit letters to the 1922 Committee on Friday declaring that they have no confidence in Mr Cameron’s leadership. 

Yesterday Mr Cameron insisted he was not going anywhere and would remain in Number 10 regardless of the result.

Asked whether he could stay in his post in the event of Brexit, he said: “Yes. I think it’s very important that the individual careers of individual politicians don’t get caught up in this question.” 

He added: “It won’t be a verdict on me, whatever the outcome is. It’s a verdict on the question, but I do care a lot about the question.” 

GETTY

Party insiders claim that Mr Cameron’s job will only be safe if he wins the referendum with a 10-point lead or more – something which looks increasingly unlikely with recent polls putting the Leave campaign ahead.

 If the Prime Minister is to survive he needs to divert the party away from damaging internal splits

A source

Sources say Downing Street is leaving nothing to chance and is drawing up a major offensive to keep him in power. 

One said: “The EU referendum campaign has paralysed government for months and the vacuum has been filled with bitter infighting. 

“If the Prime Minister is to survive he needs to divert the party away from the damaging internal splits and start focusing again on delivering the party’s one nation programme of government.” 

GETTY

The long-awaited welfare reform white paper, the childhood obesity strategy and the decision on Heathrow are among the announcements expected to be made this summer. 

A decision on Trident is also expected before the autumn and more focus will be given to the Government’s social mobility and life chances strategy, which is seen as part of the Prime Minister’s legacy. 

Along with the policy announcements, Mr Cameron is also expected to launch a reshuffle. 

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

Insiders claim former defence secretary Liam Fox could be set for a Cabinet return. 

Boris Johnson is also expected to be handed his first Cabinet job, while Amber Rudd and Michael Fallon could win promotion. 

Junior Ministers Priti Patel and Penny Mordaunt, who have both supported the Leave campaign, are not expected to be moved. 

A source said: “The narrower the victory, if David Cameron wins the referendum campaign, the faster he is likely to launch his reshuffle.”

GETTY

It is thought that following the referendum result, Mr Cameron will launch an intensive campaign to shore up support in a bid to secure his job and stabilise the party. 

Last night there were claims that Mr Johnson and Michael Gove, who are both prominent members of Vote Leave, have signed a letter saying that whatever Thursday’s result Mr Cameron must stay on. 

The hope is that this will deter Tory malcontents from trying to gather the 50 names needed to force a vote of no confidence in him among MPs.

