Share Hunter: Bondholders’ pain is Lloyds shareholders’ gain

2016-06-19

GETTY

The case threatened to open up a new wave of financial compensation, which could have seen Lloyds paying out large sums to tens of thousands of retail bondholders, just as the bank looks to be getting to the end of the PPI claims saga.

Shareholders will understandably be breathing a sigh of relief that the ruling was in the bank’s favour.

These investors will now miss out on interest payments in excess of 10 per cent a year, thanks to the convoluted terms of the bonds which allowed Lloyds to redeem them.

 RBS and Standard Chartered aren’t paying out

Indeed, the financial regulator has subsequently prohibited sale of these sorts of securities to retail investors, such is the level of expertise and analysis needed to establish if they are an appropriate investment.

The loss to bondholders is a boon to shareholders, though, and the bank is expected to save up to £1billion in interest payments as a result of redeeming the bonds.

GETTY

That all adds into the dividends pot, one of the reasons Lloyds is so prized as a stock holding by private investors. Looking across UK-listed banks, Lloyds is an obvious candidate for income investors, as all the other lights in the sector are burning so dimly.

RBS and Standard Chartered aren’t paying out, Barclays has halved its payment and, at HSBC, the current yield of 8 per cent says the market is expecting a cut.

GETTY

Lloyds, on the other hand, is starting to ramp up its dividend payments. The bank no longer has to build up its capital buffers, which means it can throw off excess cash to shareholders.

The bank has also moved decisively to simplify its business and focus on its core strengths.

Lloyds shareholders are forecast to pick up a 4.3p dividend for this year, and 5p in 2017. Based on the current price, that equates to a 6.6 per cent yield for this year, and 7.7 per cent for next.

GETTY

A Brexit vote could change this but, if not, that yield is pretty enticing while interest rates are so low and income is thin on the ground.

Disappointed bondholders could do worse than looking to the equity side of Lloyds to mend the hole in their finances.

