Ex-Brussels chief pushes for EU Army and tells leaders to work FASTER to create one

2016-06-17

GETTY

Former Nato secretary general Javier Solana, who was the EU's foreign policy chief, said the organisation's 28 members need to join forces on defence and security matters to form a united force against jihadism and radicalisation.

Speaking during a presentation of an EU study titled 'On the way towards a European Defence Union: White Book as a first step', the retired diplomat said: "As Europeans we must move towards greater integration in defence and security, so that our responses are effective."

His comments will be seized on by eurosceptics as another move towards the creation of an EU army.

Mr Solana, a former high representative for EU foreign policy, also attacked Brussels for "forgetting" to spend more money on security.

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

Other proposals set out in the document include "the establishment of a common defence market or the development of permanent structured cooperation mechanism".

But Mr Solana conceded a lack of political will among member states meant the EU was "not making progress on interoperability".

GETTY

GETTY

Leave campaigners claim the EU is now creating a new border and defence force which will further reduce national control.

However, Remain campaign group Britain Stronger in Europe insist membership of the EU "complements Nato" and that Britain is given a stronger negotiating hand as a partner in the 28-member Brussels bloc, enabling the UK to better influence EU foreign policy.

EU membership also strengthens Britain's relationship with the US, the world's largest military superpower, the In campaign say, as well as boosting counter-terrorism efforts by easing the sharing of intelligence information.

Mr Solana also argued that barriers between domestic and international terror threats were "increasingly blurred", and urged the European Parliament and Nato to maintain "continuous contact" in order to "coordinate strategies".

