Farage’s final rallying call: ‘It’s us versus the Establishment - go and vote for Britain'

2016-06-22

In his final rallying call for voters to back Brexit, the Ukip leader branded the EU referendum in less than 24 hours time a contest between “the people versus the Establishment”.

He said Brexit voters would “crawl over broken glass to get down to that polling station tomorrow” but he called on those who have never voted before to grasp the “opportunity to make a difference”.

The anti-Brussels campaigner said tomorrow’s result “may be tight, may be narrow” but added: “I genuinely believe we are going to win this”.

Addressing Ukip activists in central London in his final speech of the EU referendum campaign, Mr Farage said the key to a Leave victory would be mobilising those voters who traditionally shun elections.

Despite polls showing a swing back to Remain over the past week, Mr Farage insisted “over the last 48 hours most of that swing away has already come back” to Leave.

He said: “This is a turnout referendum, this is about who actually feels strongly enough to go out and vote.

“I have met them because I’ve been travelling endlessly in an open-top bus in the wettest spring and early summer for 100 years.

“I’ve been travelling round the country and I have met a lot of people who are agree with what we are trying to do but either haven’t voted for 10 years, or 20 years, or ever voted in their lives.

“They are key to Leave winning.”

GETTY

Mr Farage asked voters to decide whether they wanted to stay part of a political union that is set on creating a “United States of Europe”.

He said: “Let’s stop pretending what this European project is, they have an anthem, they’re building an army, they’ve already go their own police force and of course they’ve got a flag.

“At the end of the day tomorrow when people vote they must make a decision, which flag is theirs?

“And I want us to live under British passports and under the British flag.”

PA

 At the end of the day tomorrow when people vote they must make a decision, which flag is theirs?

Nigel Farage

Looking back over the past month of campaigning, Mr Farage said the “enduring images” of the Brexit debate would be the sight of one-time musician Sir Bob Geldof abusing him as he led a flotilla of Leave-supporting UK fisherman along the River Thames.

He said: “This referendum is actually quite simple, this referendum is the people versus the Establishment.

“And one of the enduring images that I will keep from this referendum is when I tried to give Britain’s ailing fishing industry the opportunity to give voice to what has happened to their communities by taking their small flotilla up the Thames.

“I thought the sight of a multi-millionaire former rock star shouting abuse, making a variety of hand gestures - not directed just at me, that would have been ok - but directed at our fishermen.

“That image for me says it all.

“It’s the vested interests, it’s the rich, it’s the big business, it’s those that are doing very nicely thank you against pretty much everybody else.

“We can do better than this, tomorrow we can vote for real change.”



In an impassioned speech, Mr Farage called on Brexit supporters to “go out and do it”.

He said: “Vote with you heart, vote with your soul, vote with pride in this country and it’s people and together we can make tomorrow our independence day.

“A big day in our national history, a day that is good for us and a day that is good for the rest of Europe too because other nations will follow us.”

With polling stations due to open at 7am tomorrow morning, the vote on Britain’s EU membership is at neck-and-neck according to recent opinion surveys.

