Katie Hopkins sickened by left using Jo Cox’s death to score political points in EU debate

2016-06-20

Hopkins said she had been left "sickened" by those she believed had used the killing of the Batley and Spen MP for political point-scoring.

But the controversial commentator’s remarks on LBC sparked an angry backlash, with one listener branding Hopkins a "manipulative liar".

While expressing sadness following Mrs Cox death last week, Hopkins said: "What has really sickened me this weekend is the amount of lectures I've had from people on the liberal left.

"About why Leave campaign is hateful, why Leave campaign is divisive, why anti-immigration rhetoric is wrong, why Jo Cox wouldn't have wanted that, what Jo Cox would have wanted was Remain.

LBC•GETTY

 Do not lecture me on what Jo Cox would have wanted

Katie Hopkins

"Do not lecture me on what Jo Cox would have wanted."

She continued: "You were supposed to have pressed pause, the Leave campaign pressed pause and all I’ve seen is people carrying on campaigning, rather more subtly but rather more horrifically, teetering on the edge of people's emotions when they are at their most vulnerable."

Hopkins' tirade led to several listeners using Twitter to criticise her.

One posted: "This individual is a manipulative liar who built a career whipping up the mob because she failed at everything else."

Another said: "Why give dross like this the oxygen of publicity?"

A third described Hopkins, a former Apprentice contestant, as "unspeakable".

School children and teachers throw flowers on to the hearse carrying murdered Member of Parliament Jo Cox's as her funeral cortege will passes through Heckmondwike in northern Britain

Mrs Cox was fatally injured outside her constituency surgery in Birstall, West Yorkshire, last Thursday.

A church service held at St Peter’s Church in Birstall over the weekend to remember her life saw her described as a "fervent advocate for the poor and the oppressed".

The Rev Paul Knight told the congregation: "Her humanity was powerful and compelling and we would do well to recognise her as an amazing example, a 21st century Good Samaritan."

Parliament will be recalled on Monday to allow MPs to make their own tributes to Mrs Cox in the House of Commons.

Commons leader Chris Grayling has thrown his support behind the idea of MPs from different parties breaking with tradition and mixing with their political rivals and sitting together in the House.

He told Pienaar’s Politics on BBC 5 Live: "If people want to do that I would completely support them in doing that.

"It is a memorial occasion. When we all gather to pay our respects conventional party politics should be miles away.

"People often don’t recognise there are genuinely good relationships across parties."

