Staying in the EU will be CATASTROPHIC for state and private pensions, expert warns

2016-06-21

GETTY

Professor David Blake, Director of the Pensions Institute at the Cass Business School, has written a paper outlining 10 reasons why staying in the EU ranges from "pretty bad to very, very bad" for pensions.

His devastating analysis came as new research by Vote Leave has revealed that just one EU directive due to come in shortly will increase the cost of British pensions by £328 million a year.

But even this figure is dwarfed by further proposals put on hold until after the referendum which will cost pension funds in the UK by a massive £500 billion.

 This would have raised the cost to UK companies of providing British pensions by £500 billion

Professor David Blake

In a detailed analysis of the EU's plans and policies, Prof Blake has warned that a vote to Remain on Thursday will be catastrophic for the pensions system.

Among the reasons are the EU plan to take control of pensions through its new social charter, the new EU rules which will starve pension funds of hundreds of billions and "an overwhelming volume of law and regulation issued by the EU every year" which is unfairly applied to the UK.

He also warned that the "insidious" trade negotiation with the US - known as the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) - could see the UK forced to privatise the state pension along with public services such as the NHS.

He said: "US multinationals will be able to sue the UK government if they are not allowed to get a big share of our public services.

"This will inevitably mean privatising a significant proportion of the NHS. Next, they will be looking to other areas of the welfare budget, such as pensions."

He also noted how the French EU Commissioner responsible for pensions wanted to introduce solvency capital for pension funds at "the insistence of French insurance companies".

He said: "This would have raised the cost to UK companies of providing British pensions by £500 billion."

He also warned that if the UK remains in the EU it could become liable for pensions in other countries such as Greece, Italy, Spain and France where the economies are failing and the countries are unable to meet their vast pensions obligations.

GETTY

He said: "There is no serious recognition of the enormous size of the pension obligations being built up on state balance sheets in all EU member states.

The EU is just kicking the can down the road - in the hope that no one will notice."

He notes that the European Central Bank's program of printing money to try to save the euro will significantly reduce pension yields.

The analysis reveals that Britain's pensions system is under serious threat from the EU's economic failings and bureaucratic plans.

In a chilling warning Prof Blake said: "We are in very real danger that we will end up with no secure pensions in either the state or private pension systems - with increasing burdens passed to future generations.



"So far from being a bastion of fairness and equality, the EU will end up being intolerably unfair to future generations."

He noted that the EU accounts for 10 per cent of the world's population, 25 per cent of the world's GDP and 50 per cent of the world's welfare benefits.

He added: "Sooner or later, economic reality will step in - as it always does. You would not want to be too close to that when it happens."

The research by Vote Leave has shown that a new EU directive on the "activities and supervision of institutions for occupational retirement provision" will give pension companies a one off hit of £328 million or £17 per person.

The expensive proposal is designed to harmonise regulation of the management of the pensions funds and information to be provided to consumers across the EU as part of the preparation for a power grab of pensions by the Commission.

GETTY

The directive was agreed to in principle by the Council of Ministers in December 2014 and is set to become law in the near future.

The Commission has already admitted that the "expected cost of the proposed action is an increase of the administrative burden mainly as a one-off adjustment cost in the short-term, and somewhat higher recurrent costs in the new regime".

The Pensions and Lifetime Savings Association has calculated that the European Commission's figures has warned of "one-off implementation costs of around £328 million for UK private sector schemes".

It continued: "Recurring costs are around a further £7.5m per year in annual recurring costs."

Former Work and Pensions Secretary Iain Duncan Smith has agreed with the analysis that remaining in the EU puts Britain’s pensions at risk.

He said: “The risks of remaining in the EU are clear and abundant, and will inevitably mean more money and more power being handed to Brussels. Take pensions for example: the European Commission has already issued proposals for pension regulation which could cost £328million for British pension funds – money that will have to be lifted in fees out of people’s retirement pots.

“If we want to take back control and secure both our futures and retirements, we have to Vote Leave on Thursday.”

---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

GETTY

TEN REASONS WHY STAYING IN THE EU WILL HAVE "PRETTY BAD TO VERY, VERY BAD CONSEQUENCES" FOR PENSIONS

By Professor David Blake

1. The socio-political model underlying the EU is completely alien to our way of thinking. It is the dirigiste model of Bismarck – providing state support from cradle to grave. There are many people in the UK who do, of course, like this model. It is the model of a ‘social Europe’. However desirable a ‘social Europe’ might be, there is a small problem with it – it is simply not affordable. That is because the EU is bankrupt. In some EU member states, such as Spain and Greece, youth unemployment is more than 50 per cent.  So rather than these young people being in work and paying the taxes needed to pay the pensions of their grandparents, they are claiming unemployment benefits themselves. The situation in these countries has become so bizarre that grandparents are forced to stay in work to pay the taxes needed to pay the unemployment benefits of their grandchildren. By contrast, our socio-political model is Beveridgean - named after William Beveridge who set up the British welfare state after the war. This model provides minimal state support and expects citizens to take responsibility for themselves above that.

2. Occupational defined benefit (DB) pension schemes in the UK and other common law countries are voluntary arrangements between the employer as scheme sponsor and the employee as scheme member. The employer made a ‘pension promise’ that would be delivered on a ‘best efforts’ basis, but over the years, the promise has been turned into a guarantee. DB schemes have been killed by over-regulation – at both UK and EU level – and have been replaced by defined contribution (DC) schemes where all the risks are borne by the scheme member. Further, the EU model is contract-based, and this is very much at odds with our trust-based system. It is far too prescriptive, compared with the flexibility of the discretionary trusts that underlie our company pension schemes. 

3. The EU wants to have a common European pension system – so workers can easily move from one country to the next and transfer their pension benefits. While this clearly makes sense, it will, in fact, be impossible to achieve due to the divergent views on the role and financing of pensions and the different tax regimes in the various member states.

4. There is an overwhelming volume of law and regulation issued by the EU every year – but it is unfairly applied to us. The UK government’s Competency Review in 2014 reported that  there had been a 10-fold increase in EU financial services law in 10 years. There is also increasing interference in retail markets, such as pensions. The UK accounts for 61% of EU DB schemes and Holland 24%, yet 20 member states with less than 1% of DB liabilities collectively have a greater say in setting supervision and funding requirements than the UK or Holland.

5. The whole point of the EU is to have a level playing field. But it is questionable whether this will ever be possible. In addition, we are to blame for gold-plating all EU legislation. For example, the UK introduced ‘debt-on-the-employer’ legislation – companies cannot walk away from their pension liabilities unless they become insolvent. We are now seeing the consequences of this with British Steel and BHS – where the pension scheme has brought the sponsoring company to its knees. Ireland which has a similar pension system to our own did not do this.

6. What we get depends on the arbitrariness of who happens to be the EU Commissioner for Financial Services. It used to be the Frenchman Michel Barnier. He wanted to introduce solvency capital for pension funds. This was at the insistence of French insurance companies. This would have raised the cost to UK companies of providing British pensions by £500bn. But it would have cost the French nothing, since they do not have private pension funds. We now have Jonathan Hill who has put everything on hold for the moment.  But it never goes away.  There is a never ending cat-and-mouse game played between the European Commission, the EU-wide regulator (EIOPA – the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority) and the national regulators and trade bodies, like our PLSA (Pensions and Lifetime Savings Association, formerly the National Association of Pension Funds). But we all know what the end game is –  ‘ever closer’ movements towards the EU’s ultimate objective of Solvency II for pension funds – i.e., what the French insurers ultimately want.

7. The European Central Bank (ECB) does not care much for our pension funds either. It is much more concerned about saving the banks in the Eurozone. It has recently introduced a policy of ‘quantitative easing’ – buying bonds, especially corporate bonds, from the banks in order to provide them with liquidity and keep them afloat. This has had the effect of driving up the price of bonds and reducing their yields. Since pension funds also buy bonds to make their pension payments, this policy makes it much more expensive for them to do so and raises the costs of our pensions. But pension funds only really operate in the UK, Holland  and Ireland, so the ECB regards the effect on our pension funds as acceptable ‘collateral damage’ in its attempt to save the euro.  The euro will eventually collapse – but it now looks as though it could bring down our pension funds with it.

GETTY

8. Just as insidious is TTIP – the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership – being secretly negotiated between the European Commission and the US.  This is at the insistence of the shadowy Bilderberg Group. US multinationals will be able to sue the UK government if they are not allowed to get a big share of our public services – such as the National Health Service.  This will inevitably mean privatising a significant proportion of the NHS. Next, they will be looking to other areas of the welfare budget, such as pensions.  It’s seems unreal, but this is the kind of thing that leaked reports are saying will be contained in TTIP when it is eventually signed: "The parties acknowledge that anti-competitive business practices and state interventions have the potential to distort the proper functioning of markets and undermine the benefits of trade liberalisation." 

9. Notwithstanding the previous point, the EU is a political project and market reality cannot be allowed to interfere with this. Supporters believe political will can overcome all other forces, in particular, economic ones. However, any attempt to turn pension funds into insurance companies – which is what Barnier and the French insurers want – will destroy not only what remains of DB schemes but also the sponsoring companies. 

10. Finally, there is no serious recognition of the enormous size of the pension obligations being built up on state balance sheets in all EU member states. The EU is just kicking the can down the road – in the hope that no one will notice.

So we are in very real danger that we will end up with no secure pensions in either the state or private pension systems – with increasing burdens passed to future generations. So far from being a bastion of fairness and equality, the EU will end up being intolerably unfair to future generations. As Angela Merkel, the German Chancellor, says: the EU has 10% of the world’s population, 25% of the world’s GDP and 50% of the world’s welfare benefits. This is clearly not sustainable.

Sooner or later, economic reality will step in – as it always does.  You would not want to be too close to that when it happens.

