EU referendum polling station told to REMOVE England flags as it 'PROMOTES BREXIT'

2016-06-23

TWITTER/GETTY

Mayfield Cricket Club in Palmers Green, Enfield, was ordered to take down the St George’s cross flags after the Electoral Commission received a number of complaints that it looked like an “EDL rally”.

Voters claimed the England flags, hung for the Euro 2016 Championships, had become a “dog whistle for the Brexit campaign”.

Christopher Lewis, 29, said he thought the clubhouse looked like an “EDL rally”.

He said:“It wasn’t that it was shocking to see the flags , it was that they should have been removed before the referendum.

READ LIVE COVERAGE OF THE EU REFERENDUM HERE

#EUreferendum why does my local polling station look like the inside of an EDF rally? pic.twitter.com/m5LDSohj05

 I think any symbol like the St George’s flag has become a dog whistle for the Brexit campaign

Christopher Lewis

“I think any symbol like the St George’s flag has become a dog whistle for the Brexit campaign.”

A statement from Enfield Council said: “St George’s flags were hanging in the private sports club as part of the club’s celebration of Euro 2016.

“They were removed promptly this morning by Enfield Council staff.” Mr Lewis, a product manager, said he thought the decision was right because flags should have been removed before the once in a generation vote.

He said: “I can only imagine this story if they were European Union flags.

“It was just so many flags and I would have thought they’d have removed them before the vote.”

WHAT CAN YOU DO AT THE POLLING STATION?

Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), makes a statement after Britain voted to leave on the European Union

REUTERS

The European Commission confirmed they had received a number of complaints.

A spokeswoman added: “These are public buildings so a lot of them have been celebrating events like the Queen’s birthday and the Euro 2016.

PA

“We advised the polling station that if they are getting complaints from voters they should take them down.”

Elsewhere in Harrow, west London, a polling station has been accused of “overt manipulation” for keeping ip Union Jack flag bunting, a banner advertising a book about the Queen and balloons in red, white and blue.

