EU referendum decision sees me utterly conflicted, admits NICK FERRARI

2016-06-20

GETTY

Things are normally black or white. I don’t do much grey. Yet this Thursday will see me utterly conflicted. 

As the gruelling in/out debate nears its end, political reputations lie in tatters, voters are left dazed and confused and something known as the truth has been ignored and traduced. The scare tactics seen last week with the laughably inept Brexit Budget were as ludicrous as they were self-defeating. 

A few weeks back I joked in this column that the only thing the Remain team hadn’t gloomily forecast was a plague of locusts and the skies turning black in the event of a Leave vote. Little did I realise how close they’re going to get. 



Chancellor George Osborne and Alistair Darling, his Labour predecessor, told us we would be £30billion out of pocket if we vote Out and the shortfall would have to be made up with tax rises, increases in the cost of fuel and energy and other punitive measures.

Seeing that a fact in this debate is as rare as a convincing performance from the England football team, it is worth pointing out that this simply will not happen. Before the words had actually come out of their mouths dozens of Conservative MPs had said they would vote it down – and that was swiftly followed by the Labour Party stating its total opposition to it.

The bullying from the Remain camp has been ceaseless. The price of everything from mortgages to socks will soar, there will be a financial Armageddon, terrorists will roam our streets and we’ll inch towards a Third World War. 

For a bit of balance, the Leave side does not emerge unscathed either in the scaremongering stakes. Bodies will be washed up on English beaches, IS sleepers will sneak into the country and Brussels will whip us like a rented mule if we miss the opportunity to exit. Oh, for someone, somewhere to try to talk about reaching for the sunlit uplands.

The truth is there are compelling reasons from both sides. For instance, we are undoubtedly bullied on too many occasions by a bunch of unelected, mostly faceless, Eurocrats over whom we have zero control. But some of the measures they have forced on us can be seen to have been beneficial.

For every mad initiative such as decreeing the height of light switches in any extension we build or outlawing light bulbs that actually work, there are also laws to clean up our water, beaches and air quality.

Migration has helped boost the economy and we should be proud of the fact that the country is doing so well that it has acted as a magnet to attract, in many cases, bright, go-getting young people who want to work, pay taxes and even start up businesses that will go on to offer employment to many.

EPA

However, in many cities and towns our schools are full and too often parents have to accept places at schools they listed as their fifth or sixth preference. Our A&E waiting rooms look like something out of the developing world and the housing shortage has reached chronic proportions. 

With Vladimir Putin being as aggressive as any Russian leader of recent times, the notion of any splintering of Europe could be seen as a potentially dangerous retrograde step, yet the responsibility for ensuring there has been no conflict in Europe for decades should surely be credited to Nato. 

Nations that trade together are unlikely to go to war but saddling most of a continent with a common currency has been an act of insanity. The powerhouse car manufacturers in Germany are never going to be on an economic par with Portuguese cork harvesters. 

So there you have it. The scaremongering will have my pencil lurching to Leave but the idea that my as-yet-unborn grandchildren would in some strange, unfathomable way be disadvantaged by being outside of Europe, routes me to Remain. My vote can be assured, then, in the next four days. Watch this space.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

PA

UNTIL the court case, it is impossible to judge the motive behind the killing of Labour MP Jo Cox. One thing is clear: Too often in cases like this the killer turns out to have had mental health issues. 

It is a fact that one of the killers of Fusilier Lee Rigby had been recommended for treatment at Broadmoor but it never happened, and he was free to walk the streets. 

Successive governments have allowed funding for mental health to be cut so much it is now known as the Cinderella branch of the NHS. What a fitting tribute to Jo Cox’s life it would be if, regardless of the outcome of the trial, that was to be reversed as soon as is possible.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

School children and teachers throw flowers on to the hearse carrying murdered Member of Parliament Jo Cox's as her funeral cortege will passes through Heckmondwike in northern Britain

GETTY

INFLAMMATORY? Possibly. Inappropriate? Probably. Necessary? Definitely. When Donald Trump challenged President Barack Obama to acknowledge the chilling aspect of Islamic terrorism in the aftermath of the Orlando killings, he was right. 

It took Obama 48 hours to address the issue and then it was only to explain why he wasn’t going to say it! The gunman was clearly fatally homophobic but was also interviewed about possible connections to Islamic terrorists on at least two occasions by the FBI. 

Ignoring this inconvenient truth achieves nothing and just allows intolerant and often inaccurate theories to flourish.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

AT FIRST sight, the advice to treat drug use as a health problem rather than a crime seems nuts. In most cases, experimenting with drugs is someone’s choice. Addiction, meanwhile, is, of course, not. 

The suggestion therefore of decriminalisation initially seems to have little merit. However, if you look at what happened in Portugal after they chose that path in 2001, you’ll see the number of drugs-related deaths has dropped by 80 per cent. 

Suddenly, the idea can be seen to be worthy of, at the very least, considerable discussion.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

GETTY

IT WAS as dark a day for journalism as it was for policing when the BBC colluded with South Yorkshire Police to beam pictures into our homes of a raid on the home of Sir Cliff Richard. At long, long last the gruesome spectre of a possible prosecution can be lifted from the shoulders of the hugely popular singer. 

Sir Cliff, 75, had to wait nearly two years for the decision not to proceed. In a mealy-mouthed statement, the police bleated about the need to investigate matters fully. What utter trash. 

Following up fanciful, unsubstantiated claims without rigorously testing them or seeking some sort of corroboration shames the police. Opting to spend some of our TV licence cash on a helicopter to cover it does the same for the BBC.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Nigel Farage sank gobby Bob Geldof without trace during the singer’s Thames protest. Farage pointed out that the multimillionaire star knows little of the lives of fishermen and women.

