Now even MORE data suggests UK headed for BREXIT in EU Referendum tomorrow

2016-06-22

GETTY

Britons are talking about the United Kingdom leaving the EU around twice as much as they are discussing the Remain campaign, new data has revealed.

Users on social media site Twitter seem much more preoccupied with the Leave campaign – racking up 800,000 mentions against the 400,000 for Remain.

According to an analysis by social monitoring tool Brandwatch, up until June 7 2016 there were 5.4 million tweets mentioning the EU referendum in the last two months.

The news comes as Google unveiled search data around the In-Out EU referendum which also pointed to a greater emphasis on a Brexit.

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

Brandwatch said: "Of course, this doesn’t necessarily mean that more people using social media will actually vote Leave and these mentions will include people who are talking about the Leave campaign but don’t necessarily support it.

"However, the fact that Leave-related hashtags are registering at nearly double the rate Remain ones are is definitely interesting."

Pollsters have struggled to call a clear outcome for the June 23 vote. 

On Monday, two online surveys had the Leave camp as in the lead but only hours later two other polls showed Britons narrowly favouring the Remain option.

GETTY

BlackRock, the world's biggest asset manager, said on Tuesday it was now using Twitter to track activity in both camps in a quest for clarity.

The economy and immigration have so far dominated conversation, the Brandwatch data showed. 

Prime Minister David Cameron is the most mentioned political leader, followed by "Vote Leave" figurehead Boris Johnson and eurosceptic UKIP leader Nigel Farage.

GETTY

The count for the EU referendum will begin at 382 venues across the UK soon after polling stations close their doors at 10pm on Thursday June 23. 

Local and regional results will come in overnight before the national declaration of the result, which is expected at around breakfast time on Friday June 24. 

If Britain does vote to leave the EU, the result will prompt huge celebrations among Brexit campaigners and Eurosceptics across Britain.

