Even BRUSSELS pours scorn on Project Fear: Juncker REFUSES to endorse PM's scaremongering

2016-06-20

EPA/PA

Jean-Claude Juncker pointedly declined to back up the Prime Minister’s economic arguments about Brexit and did not deny the Europhiles’ own admission that it would push up wages for ordinary Britons. 

Embarrassingly for Mr Cameron he would not even support the PM’s argument that his disastrous and roundly mocked EU ‘renegotiation’ deal will help reduce migration. 

The all-powerful European Commission (EC) President was grilled over comments by the chairman of Britain Stronger in Europe, Lord Stuart Rose, indicating that hard-working families would enjoy a pay-rise if we vote to leave on Thursday. 

He was also asked about Mr Cameron’s disastrous Project Fear campaign, which has attempted to scare voters into backing Brussels through a series of unbelievable prophesies of doom, including one that Brexit would spark World War Three. 

REUTERS

PA/REUTERS

But rather than back up the beleaguered PM, Mr Juncker instead delivered an embarrassing public snub by point blank refusing to endorse the Remain camp’s economic arguments. 

In a written answer to a question by Ukip’s employment spokeswoman Jane Collins, he simply said: “The Commission does not speculate on hypothetical situations.” 

Mrs Collins, the MEP for Yorkshire and North Lincolnshire, also openly invited the chief Eurocrat to publicly back Mr Cameron’s much-maligned ‘renegotiation’ deal on migrants’ benefits. 

She asked him: “Does the Commission believe that the UK’s higher minimum wage and additional in-work benefits act as a draw to migrant workers from other areas of the EU to come to the UK?” 

GETTY

EPA

 Big companies love the EU - it keeps them rich and their workers poorer

Jane Collins MEP

But rather than back up Mr Cameron, who was humiliated by other European leaders earlier this year when they rejected his call for meaningful reform of migrant benefits, Mr Juncker instead poured cold water on the miserly deal the PM did secure. 

He replied: “The Commission is not in a position to comment on specific motives for migration between EU Member States, as these motives are highly individual and differ from case to case.” 

Mrs Collins said that the telling reply showed even the EU was not prepared to “back the In campaign and George Osborne over their wage fall scaremongering in the event of Brexit”. 

She said: ”Today the European Commission responded to a question I asked about wages in the UK post Brexit and refused to endorse the ludicrous and economically illiterate claims that wages would fall should we take control of our country.

"Big companies love the EU - it keeps them rich and their workers poorer.”



Her comments came as a raft of big businesses bosses including Sir Richard Branson and car manufacturers warned that leaving the EU would dent British manufacturing. 

But Ford, one of the companies involved, was immediately embroiled in controversy after it emerged it has taken a low-interest loan from the EU, funded by British taxpayers, to close down its plant in Southampton and relocate it to Turkey. 

Mrs Collin said the American giant was guilty of “hypocrisy” over its stance on Europe, adding that Brexit would mean big companies would find it "less easy to take British tax payers money to export jobs."

And Virgin founder Sir Richard was also savaged on social media after he announced his own campaign to keep Britain in the EU, with critics pointing out his tax arrangements and residency in the British Virgin Islands. 

Britons will decide whether or not to sever ties with Brussels in an historic referendum on Thursday.

Recent opinion polls have shown the two sides neck and neck ahead of the vote, with many experts predicting the result will go down to the wire.

