EU referendum 2016: What are the full details of Cameron's deal? All the key points

2016-06-23

Getty 

The Prime Minister secured a deal to change Britain's membership of the EU during a crunch summit in Brussels in February. 

As the date of the EU referendum nears, here is a look back at what Mr Cameron managed to actually achieve during the high-profile renegotiation. 

Brexit campaigners have slammed his deal as a sham and have united together in the battle to free Britain from Brussels rule. 

Here is a look at six points from the Prime Minister's controversial deal. WHAT IS BREXIT?

Mr Cameron managed to get an ‘emergency brake’ on the payment of in-work benefits to EU immigrants coming into the UK.

This ‘emergency brake’ would allow EU member states to stop paying benefits to new migrants if there are strains on public services or the employment market.

If the UK wanted to pull the emergency brake, it would have to explain how the “exceptional” influx of migrants was affecting its social security system. 



Getty

Mr Cameron’s initial proposal for a four-year ban on in-work benefits for EU migrants hit a wall of resistance from eastern European countries, who regarded it as discrimination against their nationals.

Instead, the final deal allows benefits to be gradually phased in over a period of four years, as the worker contributes more to their new home through taxation.

Crucially, the brake would last for a period of seven years, with no option for renewal.



The proposed 'red card' would allow a group of national parliaments to object to new EU laws in the pipeline.

But it would not give parliaments the power to completely veto unwanted laws. 

EU lawmakers could still go ahead with an unpopular law as long as they make changes to address the concerns raised by the red card. 

More than 55% of national parliaments have to make “reasoned” objections in order to trigger the red card process. 



The EU deal means that Britain would no longer be bound by the commitment to an 'ever closer union' between European countries. 

Although a symbolic political move, this EU demand does not change how the EU works or the powers held by Brussels. 

The final deal recognised that the UK “is not committed to further political integration into the European Union”. 

In February Mr Cameron told Parliament: “We do not want to have our country bound up in an ever closer political union in Europe.”

Under the deal, countries must continue to pay child benefit to parents whose children live in another EU country. 

But the deal means that ‘exported’ family benefits can be reduced in line with the standard of living in the place that the children live.

Mr Cameron initially vowed to stop the payments of child benefit to migrant workers for offspring living overseas in their home countries.

But the deal instead allows host nations to "index" the benefit to the same rate as in the child's home country, which is usually lower than the UK.

The cut applies initially only to new immigrants, but will be applicable to all existing claimants - including 34,000 in the UK - from January 1 2020.

The document states explicitly that the same approach will not be applied in future to old-age pensions.

British Prime Minister David Cameron speaks at Downing Street

The EU deal restates Britain's right not to join the euro.

It also outlaws discrimination against companies and individuals on the basis of the currency of their home country.

It states that countries outside the single currency will not be required to fund euro bailouts and will be reimbursed for central EU funds used to prop up the euro.

And it provides a right for any member state to escalate concerns about the impact of eurozone decisions for urgent discussion in the European Council.

On financial regulation, the deal said: "The single rulebook is to be applied by all credit institutions and other financial institutions in order to ensure the level-playing field within the internal market."

The deal confirms measures to deny free movement rights to nationals from outside the EU who marry an EU national, as well as action to tackle the use of sham marriages to gain residence rights.

Nations' rights to exclude people believed to pose a security risk are confirmed, even where the individuals affected have no previous convictions.

It said members can take "restrictive measures" to protect themselves against those who are "likely to represent a genuine and serious threat to public policy or security”. 

