WATCH: 'Can YOU name the presidents of the EU?' Andrea Leadsom savages 'undemocratic' EU

2016-06-22

The Tory MP passionately outlined the many faults of the 28-country bloc and asked whether anyone at Wembley Arena could even name the five EU presidents. 

The cabinet member for energy said: “The truth is, 60 per cent of our rules and regulations comes from the European Union. 

“As city minister and now as energy minister, all day long I’m told ‘you can’t do that, you can’t do this because of the EU’. 

“The truth is, there are five presidents of the EU. Now can anyone name them? And did anyone vote for them? No, you didn’t vote for them because you’re not allowed to vote for them and you can’t kick them out either.



BBC 

“And the problem is, in the EU there are 10,000 officials – that’s nearly twice the number of people in this room, by the way – who earn more than the UK Prime Minister – and you’re paying for them, and that gravy train is continuing.”

In response to Remain campaigner Ruth Davidson’s assertion that Britain was an influential presence in Europe, she responded: “That is an extraordinary claim. 

“We, Britain, have voted against Europe 70 times and 70 times we have been outvoted. So how does that mean we have any influence in Europe?”

BBC

BBC

Her passionate tirade against the EU provoked applause and cheers from the 6,000-strong crowd, with Remain campaigner Frances O’Grady forced to wait for the noise to die down before making her point. 

Miss Leadsom was fiery answers throughout the debate, accusing the EU of not even being able to “organise a takeaway curry.”

She said: “Many countries in the world do more business with the EU than the UK does. You do not need to be in the single market, we do not need that.



BBC 

“We are the world’s fifth biggest economy and most economies can agree trade deals in two years. The European Union is taking 10 years or never at all. 

“Why? Because 28 member states cannot even organise a takeaway curry let alone what they’re going to do on free trade with the rest of the world.”

