Michael Gove likens pro-EU financial experts to Nazis

2016-06-22

The vast majority of economists and financial institutions have warned a Brexit could have significant and far-reaching consequences for the British economy.

But speaking to Iain Dale on LBC, Mr Gove, a leader member of the Leave campaign, said freeing the UK from the low growth rates in Europe would bring about greater prosperity.

He said: "I think the key thing here is to interrogate the assumptions that are made and to ask if these arguments are good.

"We have to be careful about historical comparisons, but Albert Einstein during the 1930s was denounced by the German authorities for being wrong and his theories were denounced, and one of the reasons of course he was denounced was because he was Jewish.

GETTY

 The truth is that if you look at the quality of the analysis, if you look at the facts on the ground, you can come to an appropriate conclusion

Michael Gove

"They got 100 German scientists in the pay of the government to say that he was wrong and Einstein said: 'Look, if I was wrong, one would have been enough'.

"The truth is that if you look at the quality of the analysis, if you look at the facts on the ground, you can come to an appropriate conclusion.

"And the appropriate conclusion, I think, all of us can come to is that with growth rates so low in Europe, with so many unemployed and with the nature of the single currency so damaging, freeing ourselves from that project can only strengthen our economy."

Mr Gove, who sits in the Cabinet with George Osborne, also dismissed the Chancellor’s claims he had "no plan" for the UK leaving the EU.

He said: "One of the things about this campaign is people on the Remain side have to maintain right up until the vote a particular stance and I don't criticise them for it.

A Royal Wedding, The Wombles and a new James Bond

"The French politicians will say if you vote to leave then these terrible things will happen and people in the Treasury have to maintain with iron certainty that we're definitely going to vote to remain and they mustn't allow for any alternative possibility to be entertained.

"But inside the Treasury and indeed in the French foreign office they're preparing for a Leave vote and preparing to ensure that it works in the most stable way in all our interests.

"But it's one of those things you can't admit."

On Tuesday, the prime minister delivered a special address outside Number 10 to make a major intervention to urge people to vote Remain.

He said: "I know Europe isn't perfect, believe me I understand and I see those frustrations. I feel them myself.

"That's why we negotiated and enhanced our special status - out of the euro, keeping our borders, not involved in ever closer union. We have the best of both worlds.

"So as you take this decision, whether to remain or leave, do think about the hopes and dreams of your children and grandchildren."

In another sign of growing cracks in the Tory camp following the EU debate, Mr Gove also threatened to resign from David Cameron’s cabinet over broken promises on immigration should Britain Remain. 

The Eurosceptic said he didn’t think the prime minister would be able to stick to his promise to reduce net migration below 100,000. 

He told the Daily Telegraph: "Making promises and then saddling yourself with a political system and a political union that means you cannot deliver those promises, I fear, doesn’t contribute to an atmosphere of trust and confidence in politics."

Campaigning on Wednesday in the wake of his comments Mr Gove apologised for the "clumsy" comparison.

He said: "Yesterday I was asked a question by Iain Dale about the predictions of doom for the economy. I answered as I often do with a historical analogy.

"It was clumsy and inappropriate. Obviously, I did not mean to imply anything about the motives of those who have spoken out in favour of staying in the EU.

"Throughout the campaign I’ve avoided making personal attacks, I'm sorry for speaking so clumsily, and apologise for giving offence.

"I think Britain will be more prosperous if we end our connection to the euro project and I should have answered this question directly."

