WATCH: Nigel Farage declares VICTORY in EU referendum with barnstorming speech

2016-06-24

The Ukip boss, who has spearheaded the United Kingdom's departure from the European Union, addressed the Brexit faithful at a referendum party.

He said: "The dawn is breaking on a independent UK. If the predictions are right this will be a victory for the real people, for the ordinary people, and for the decent people."

After branding the EU a "failed project", the outspoken anti-Brussels campaigner called for David Cameron to resign "immediately" as Prime Minister.

He said: "We fought against the multi-nationals, we fought against the big merchant banks, we fought against lies, corruption and deceit.

"Honesty, decency and belief in nation is going to win. And we will have done it without having to fight, without a single bullet being fired.

"We'll have done it by damn hard work. By people like my friend Arron Banks; by people in Labour, the Conservative Party, Ukip and in no party.

GETTY

 Let June 23 go down in history as our Independence Day

Nigel Farage

"We'll have done it not just for ourselves, we'll have done it for the whole of Europe.

"I hope this victory brings bring down this failed project. Let's get rid of the flag, the anthem, Brussels and all that has gone wrong.

"Let June 23 go down in history as our Independence Day."

GETTY

The Remain camp was undermined by poor results in many of Labour's traditional strongholds, including Sheffield, where Mr Farage hailed Leave's "amazing" victory.

But when polls closed at 10pm, the MEP appeared to have conceded defeat. He told reporters in London: "It's been an extraordinary referendum campaign.

"Turnout looks to be exceptionally high. It looks like Remain will edge it. Ukip and I are going nowhere and the party will only continue to grow in the future."

Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), makes a statement after Britain voted to leave on the European Union

Earlier this month a confident Mr Farage placed a £1,000 bet on Britons voting to cut ties with the 28-member bloc, saying: "I'm feeling lucky."

When asked if he expected to see a return he added: "Absolutely, I am very bullish about this. Everywhere we go people are saying they want to leave."

A Ladbrokes spokesman said: "While the odds are still stacked against him, he is confident he'll be returning to pick up some cash to pay for the independence beers."



Ukip's only MP Douglas Carswell, who is known to have a frosty relationship with Mr Farage, said Mr Cameron has a "duty" to remain Prime Minister.

Exiting Leave HQ, the Clacton MP said: "This is really serious stuff here, and the less we hear from Nigel over the next few weeks and months the better.

"David Cameron won a mandate. I'm not his biggest fan, but he has a duty to stay in Downing Street, to oversee this and make it happen. And that will happen."

