Who was Jo Cox? Dedicated Labour MP, loving mother and passionate campaigner mourned

2016-06-16

PA Twitter

A gunman shouting '"Britain First" shot and stabbed the MP while she was conducting a surgery for her constituents at Birstall Library. 

Mrs Cox died from her injuries this afternoon. Politicians on both sides of the EU referendum debate have mourned her death and suspended campaigning. 

Here is a tribute to the dedicated politician, loving mother and tireless campaigner who died this afternoon to the shock of the nation.  

Mrs Cox, 41, was a rising star in the Labour party and had been a committed MP for Batley and Spen in West Yorkshire since the last general election in 2015.

The politician was a deeply passionate and strong believer that Britain should vote to remain in the EU during the referendum next week.  

Mrs Cox’s Twitter profile also describes her as a “proud Yorkshire lass”, mountain climber, foreign aid worker and “boat dweller”. 

She lived with her devoted husband Brendan and their two young daughters on a boat moored on the Rivers Thames near Tower Bridge. 

PA

Mrs Cox was born in the Yorkshire town of Batley, studied at a state grammar school in Heckmondwike and went to Cambridge University. 

The MP said she became political when she went to university and realised that how you spoke, who you knew and where you were born "mattered”.

“Having gone through that experience of being in a Cambridge college, surviving it and building myself up, meant that coming here [Westminster] was a walk in the park, and a lot of the same people are here!” she told the Yorkshire Post. 

After graduating, Mrs Cox helped to form pro-European campaign group Britain in Europe and worked with Labour politician Baroness Kinnock in Brussels.

pic.twitter.com/mPOaytowxN

The fearless aid worker spent a decade working for Oxfam, which included visits to warzones and a stint as the charity's head of policy.  

She told the Yorkshire Post: “I’ve been in some horrific situations where women have been raped repeatedly in Darfur, I’ve been with child soldiers who have been given Kalashnikov and kill members of their own family in Uganda."

She also worked with Gordan Brown's wife Sarah to push for international action to prevent deaths in childbirth. As national chair of Labour Women's Network, she encouraged more women to enter public life. 

Before being elected to the House of Commons, she worked for the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and an anti-slavery charity called Freedom Fund.

Reuters

The MP was one of the rising stars of the Labour backbenches and had pushed for the UK to accept more child refugees from Syria. 

Last year she launched the All Party Parliamentary Friends of Syria group and abstained from the vote on military intervention there. 

Mrs Cox was one of the Labour MPs who nominated Jeremy Corbyn for the Labour leadership contest. 



Her website says: "Among Jo’s parliamentary interests are foreign policy, international development, early years education and social isolation.

"She is also taking a keen interest in the northern economy and regional devolution and is a member of the Communities and Local Government select committee."



My hubby @MrBrendanCox & children taking part in the battle of the #Thames - because we're #StrongerIn #Remain pic.twitter.com/6JNMnQ4Zfg

Team #Remain preparing to take to the river against @Nigel_Farage boats! #StrongerIn pic.twitter.com/CGdjjL94mb

Mrs Cox’s husband Brendan has paid a deeply moving tribute to her saying that she lived every day of her life to the full. 

“Jo believed in a better world and she fought for it every day of her life with an energy, and a zest for life that would exhaust most people,” he said.

“She would have wanted two things above all else to happen now, one that our precious children are bathed in love and two, that we all unite to fight against the hatred that killed her.”

Her family was part of a battle on the River Thames when Remain boats, led by Bob Geldof, took on the flotilla led by Brexiteer Nigel Farage.

The politician applauded her husband and her children for taking part in the clash on the Thames on Wednesday June 15.  

She tweeted: “So proud of @MrBrendanCox & my kids for getting out on the Thames to protest against @Nigel_Farage flotilla! #Remain.”







Utterly shocked by the news of the attack on Jo Cox. The thoughts of the whole Labour Party are with her and her family at this time.

