Desperate Juncker makes panic calls to EU leaders just HOURS before referendum vote

2016-06-23

GETTY 

As Britons head to the polls in their millions, the President of the European Commission reportedly phoned Angela Merkel, Chancellor of European powerhouse Germany, “moments ago”.

Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi was also in contact with the beleaguered former president of Luxembourg last night before polls opened at 7am this morning.

And the unelected official is set to speak to French President Francois Hollande after the once in a generation result comes in tomorrow, Commission spokesman Margaritis Schinas said.

Mr Schinas confirmed the EU would not be commenting today, adding: “The only one to speak to is the British."

READ LIVE COVERAGE OF THE EU REFERENDUM HERE

GETTY 

 The only one to speak to is the British

It comes after it emerged Brussels’ top bureaucrat warned David Cameron there will be no reforms to Britain’s EU membership on top of the Prime Minister’s February renegotiation deal.

Juncker repeated Brussels’ warning a Brexit vote will not extract greater concessions from the EU in a bid to keep Britain in the bloc.

Brussels has already pre-prepared a one line statement in the event of a British exodus from the 28-nation bloc it was revealed today.

If the people of Britain back Brexit during today’s historic EU referendum, members will simply respond by reportedly saying: “We respect the decision and we regret it."

And the home of the European Union has issued a desperate plea begging Britons to vote to Remain in today’s historic referendum.

GETTY 

Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), makes a statement after Britain voted to leave on the European Union

Belgian newspaper Le Soir urged the UK to “stay with us” warning Brexit would be “a huge failure for the EU”.

Today voters across Britain will turn out to have their say in what has been described as the most important vote in our generation.

Experts have predicted the decision could see the largest turnout of UK voters in decades, with more than 46 million people eligible to cast their vote.

BREXIT FIRST 100 DAYS 

REUTERS 

Polls opened across the country at 7am this morning and will remain open until 10pm as the nation answers the most important question for a generation.

David Cameron was the first campaign leader to cast his vote in the EU referendum this morning.

Meanwhile, Nicola Sturgeon, Michael Gove, Jeremy Corbyn and Nigel Farage have also had their say at polling stations across the UK.

BREXIT MAPPED: WHAT WOULD HAPPEN IN EUROPE?

