Brexit: How important will turnout be to the EU referendum result?

2016-06-23

Getty

The number of Brexit supporters who turn out to vote today is set to play a pivotal role in shaping the EU referendum result. 

The rival campaigns not only needed to win over voters but also to convince them to get out and vote on election day. 

Here is a look at how turnout could swing the result, which would change the course of British and European history.   

BREXIT: LATEST POLLS, ODDS, PREDICTIONS



The latest opinion polls have shown how important turnout will be in helping to decide the result of the EU referendum.  

A final poll put Leave at 43%, Remain at 41% and those would remain undecided or will not vote at 16%, according to pollster TNS. 

But another survey, by Opinium Research, found that the result was "too close to call" with Leave at 45%, only just ahead of Remain at 44%. 

Expert Luke Taylor, from TNS, said: “Clearly, with a race as close as this, the turnout level among different demographic groups will be critical in determining the result.”



Recent polls, from ORB, showed that the pro-EU camp had just gained the edge in part due to an increasing number of Remain supporters expected to vote.

Predicted turnout for Remain voters went up from 54% on June 7 to 69% on June 21. But Leave turnout fell from 69% to 64% over the same period.

The Leave campaign dramatically surged ahead in the opinion polls last week, which might have made Brexit supporters more complacent and less likely to vote. 

Tory election guru and political strategist Lynton Crosby pointed to a rise in the number of people who believe that the Leave camp will claimed victory. 



“This could be contributing to complacency among Leave voters – the same complacency problem I’ve previously highlighted as a potential threat for the Remain campaign – that is driving down the importance of voting on Thursday and, in turn, negatively affecting Leavers’ motivations to head to the polling booths,” he wrote in the Daily Telegraph.   

“Alternately, it could be motivating Remainers who didn’t think their vote was needed to decide they better show up.”

The boost in expected turnout for the Remain side followed the horrific murder of pro-EU MP Jo Cox on Thursday. 

YouGov head of political and social research Joe Twyman last month said its data showed that those who wish to leave the EU are more likely to say they will vote than Remainers. 

Mr Twyman said: “This means we can conclude, generally speaking at least, that a lower turnout come polling day should favour the Leave campaign.”

The result of the referendum could be decided by the turnout rate of the UK’s young voters, according to Electoral Reform Society statistics. 

The knife-edge vote could be swung towards Remain if turnout among people aged under 35 increases more than that of older voters. 

But if the number of voters over the age of 35 increases a lot more than the youth vote, Britain must prepare to leave the 28-country bloc. 

Young voters tend to be more supportive of the EU compared to the older generation. 

Express

The weather in different parts of the country could also affect how many people turn out to vote in each area.

The Met Office has issued a yellow warning for rain across parts of the south east of England today. Scattered heavy showers are also forecast across Scotland and Northern Ireland. 

With heavy rain in London and Scotland today, the capital city's and Scotland's mainly pro-EU voters may be discouraged from going out to vote. 

WEATHER HELL: VOTERS EXPECTED TO STAY HOME

Good morning, Mostly dry, but heavy showers in the south-east and north-west. https://t.co/bebdvuGJVV ^Barny pic.twitter.com/C1OoEmV3wp

