Brexit aftermath: What WILL happen when Britain leaves the EU?

2016-06-24

Getty

After the Eurosceptics won the historic EU referendum on Thursday June 23, this country and its relationship with the world would change forever. 

Brexit campaigners are united by a positive vision of Britain breaking free from the grasp of Brussels in order to take back control and shape the nation’s destiny. 

The initial answer to the question on June 24 is nothing. The referendum is not binding law. It would signal only that the wish of the British people is to leave the EU, and would spark negotiations to begin setting the terms for separation.

David Cameron has resigned as prime minister and said a new leader should take up office by October. Then negotiations could kick off relatively quickly.

The UK government will have to invoke Article 50 which states that "Any Member State may decide to withdraw from the Union in accordance with its own constitutional requirements."

That would begin a two-year period before negotiations would have to be complete and Britain would have to exit.

Mr Cameron said that it will be up to the next prime to decide when to invoke Article 50. 

WHAT WOULD HAPPEN IF BRITAIN STAYS?

Europhiles have painted a picture of uncertainty, economic chaos and the dangers of the “leap into the dark”.

Here is a look at a range of optimistic predictions and scaremongering warnings over what could happen to Britain in a post-Brexit world.

Getty

Eurosceptics say that leaving the EU would allow Britain to regain control of its borders in order to curb soaring immigration and increase security.

Britain will no longer have to accept ‘free movement of people’ from Europe, which Brexit campaigners argue puts pressure on public services such as the NHS and schools. 

Ukip leader Nigel Farage says Britain could only ever get an ‘Australian-style points system’ as an independent country outside of the EU. 

But the Remain campaign argues that the British economy benefits from the free movement of foreign workers in the EU. 

Some Europhiles have also argued that Brexit would compromise the UK’s ability to fight cross-border crime and terrorism. 

Prime Minister David Cameron even said he suspects that ISIS leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi “would be happy” when Britain leaves the EU. 

BREXIT: WHAT WOULD HAPPEN TO EXPATS?

Reuters

The Treasury has issued a series of dire warnings, even claiming that Britain would be plunged into a year-long recession in the event of Brexit. 

Pro-EU Chancellor George Osborne warns that the pound would weaken, while up to 820,000 jobs could be lost within two years. 

He has claimed that the economy would be six per cent smaller and British households would each be worse off by £4,300 a year by 2030. 

But Brexit campaigners have dismissed the Government’s scaremongering analysis saying there is no evidence that the pound would fall. 

Eurosceptics believe that Brexit would allow Britain to take back control of its economy, paving the way for future prosperity.

HOW MUCH DOES THE EU COST BRITAIN?



Brexit campaigners believe that leaving the EU would allow Britain to make its own trade deals with global powers such as the US and India. 

They argue it is in Europe’s interests to strike a favourable deal with Britain while UK businesses would be freed from EU red tape and regulations.

In contrst the Remain camp has argued that the UK would become embroiled in lengthy trade negotiations, face more trade barriers and lose access to the internal market.  

Pro-EU campaigners have also warned that companies based in the UK may decide to relocate if they can no longer access the single market. 

GUIDE TO TRADE MODELS IN POST-BREXIT WORLD



PA

The Brexit campaign argue that the EU referendum is a once in a lifetime opportunity for Britain to restore its sovereignty.

Eurosceptics see EU institutions as inherently undemocratic and argue that laws that affect the UK should not be decided by bureaucrats in Brussels. 

Brexit supporter MP Boris Johnson said that the EU has “very greatly eroded” the public’s ability to elect politicians to pass laws that matter to them. 

But the Remain side has highlighted the benefits and rights that are enshrined under EU law. Europhiles argue that the UK would wield less power to act internationally outside the EU. 

Pros and cons of Brexit

There have been warnings over increased travel costs plus a rise in the price of imports, food and other everyday items.  

Many of the negative predictions are based on the pound weakening against the euro and dollar. The pound fell sharply after the news of the Brexit vote broke. 

Hargreaves Lansdown head of investment research Mark Dampier said that a vote to leave would prompt “short-term market shocks”. 

“But let’s not get too carried away,” Mr Dampier added. "After any bounce, reality will dawn and markets will start to worry about things like the US election, Greek debt and everything else they have forgotten to worry about.”

BREXIT: WHAT WOULD HAPPEN TO THE WEEKLY SHOP 

