Referendum must not be decided on one terrible crime, says LEO MCKINSTRY

2016-06-20

GETTY/PA

A glittering political career has been cut short, a family left numb with grief. The tributes to her from across the political spectrum shows how widely she was admired, due to her dedication and decency.

The sense of outrage is compounded by the recognition that this may have been, in part, a politically motivated crime, given that the man charged, Thomas Mair, is alleged to be a Right-wing extremist and police are said to be probing links to neo-Nazi and white supremacist groups.

In the magistrate’s court on Saturday, he declared his name to be “death to traitors, freedom for Britain”. Political assassinations are extremely rare in this country. Following the creation of proper Parliamentary governance in the late 18th Century, there have been only eight.

 I don’t think we should link the referendum with Jo’s death

Rachel Reeves Labour MP

It is inevitable, in view of the intense media coverage, that this atrocity should have an impact on the EU Referendum. Yet it would be a travesty of democracy if the referendum were to be decided by a single, appalling crime.

Voters will go to the polls in the shadow of this barbarity, but the outcome should not be settled by it. At the heart of the EU debate are fundamental questions about our national sovereignty, self-governance and independence.

Effectively, we are going to choose who should rule our country: Britain or Brussels. This is not a vote on Jo Cox, no matter how admirable she was. Nor is it a vote on far-Right extremists, no matter how vile they are.

This is recognised by honourable figures in the Remain camp such as Rachel Reeves, the Labour MP, who said: “I don’t think we should link the referendum with Jo’s death.”

But other pro-EU elements have been less scrupulous. With shameless opportunism, they now try to deploy the assassination as an instrument for discrediting Leave.

The central theme of this cynical exploitation is that anti-EU campaigners can partly be blamed for Jo Cox’s death because they have unleashed dark forces through their toxic attacks on the ruling elite and mass immigration.

PA

“When you encourage rage, you cannot feign surprise when people become enraged,” wrote one Remain commentator.

In practice, this kind of language amounts to a ruthless smear tactic against the Leave campaign. It is a new version of the classic method of guilt by association, developed in the 1950s by the repugnant US Senator Joseph McCarthy, who sought to destroy liberalism in America by portraying all his opponents as cryptoCommunists.

Just like the bullying senator, the modern breed of Remain McCarthyites want to shut down all robust debate. They aim to do this by portraying the views of the Leave campaign as so “toxic” that they must not be aired.

In effect, they want to turn the last stretch of the referendum into a vast “safe space”, like those university campuses where students refuse to hear any opinions that depart from the fashionable progressive orthodoxy.

SWNS

This is especially true of immigration, perhaps the key issue in the referendum. The pro-EU brigade wants to paint any opposition to the EU’s open borders policy as a dangerous heresy that must be crushed.

The implication is that the electorate should not even be allowed to discuss the expansion of our population by almost one million newcomers every year or the strain on public services or the continuing migration crisis in Europe.

But that is absurd. There is nothing racist about objecting to the disastrous consequences of the EU’s free movement approach. Nor is there anything remotely bigoted about wanting Britain to take back control of our borders, laws, welfare and taxes.

The smear of Right-wing extremism is particularly offensive given the range of Leave supporters, who include Tory moderates such as Priti Patel – herself the daughter of Kenyan Asian immigrants – top businessmen such as Anthony Bamford of JCB and workingclass Labour MPs like Dennis Skinner.

School children and teachers throw flowers on to the hearse carrying murdered Member of Parliament Jo Cox's as her funeral cortege will passes through Heckmondwike in northern Britain

What all these people want is democracy for Britain, the very antithesis of the far Right’s attachment to totalitarianism and the triumph of a cruel, narrow ideology. The attempt to malign the entire Leave campaign is dangerous as well as unjust.

After every Islamist incident, progressives warn against demonising the entire Muslim population, yet some of the Remainers are indulging in just such sweeping assumptions about the entire Leave campaign.

Such an emphasis on politics carries, in a perverse way, the risk of absolving Jo Cox’s killer of responsibility for his crime, as if he were pushed over the edge by the inflammatory rhetoric of others.

PA

That is precisely the sort of excuse-making we often hear about jihadists. But there can never be the slightest justification for murderous terrorism, whether it be related to Israel, Ireland or immigration.

Above all, there is nothing more incendiary that the drive by EU supporters to stifle legitimate, robust debate. Far from promoting stability such an approach actually leaves the field open for the extremists – as we can see in the rise of the neo-Nazi Golden Dawn movement in Greece and Pegida in Germany.

We do not need the same malignancy here. This week’s vote must be an exercise in free democracy.

