Germany promised to recognise Hurst’s disputed 1966 World Cup goal if Britain remained

2016-06-24

GETTY

Many newspapers across Europe had pleaded for Britain to reject the vote Leave campaign in the build up to the EU referendum. 

Bild, with a front page addressed ‘Dear Brits’, even revealed inside the paper that they had placed a £10,000 bet on Britain staying in the EU, and offered to spend the winnings on investing in a ‘German-British friendship’.



In addition to the ‘friendship’, Bild also offered other bribes, many football related, including recognising the disputed Geoff Hurst goal in the 1966 World Cup final, as well as removing their goalkeepers from the goal during future penalty shootouts.

England and Germany have a long held footballing rivalry which Bild play on within their bribes.

PH

Geoff Hurst’s contentious goal put England 3-2 ahead of the then West Germany, resulting in controversy as the Germans were adamant it landed on the line after hitting the crossbar.

England fans, however, insist the ball crossed the line before bouncing out of the goal.

Germany however, got their revenge when they knocked England out of the 1990 World Cup in the semi-finals through a penalty shootout and the semi-finals of the 1996 Euros.

Other bribes offered by Bild included supplying the ‘baddie’ for every James Bond film, as well as putting its clocks back one hour in order to be on the same time zone as Britain.

An EU guideline to ban froth on beer was also promised to be introduced, as well as a goodwill gesture to attend the Queen’s 100th birthday if Britain opted to remain within the EU.

GETTY

We'll acknowledge the Wembley goal

We'll stop making jokes about Prince Charles's ears

We'll stop using sun cream on the beach out of solidarity with your sunburn

We'll reserve a place with our towels for you on the hotel sun-lounger

We'll introduce tea breaks



GETTY

We'll turn our clocks back an hour to be in synch with you

We'll do without a goalie in penalty shoot-outs with you to make it a bit more exciting

We'll send (German national football manager) Joachim Low to guard your Crown Jewels

We'll introduce an EU regulation banning a frothy head on beer

We'll all come along to the Queen's 100th birthday

We'll willingly provide the villain in every Bond film

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

 Were the British to leave the EU, it would be a threefold catastrophe

Spiegel

Other newspapers within Europe to appeal to Britain included French newspapers Liberation and La Croix, as well as Danish paper Politiken and Polish paper Fakt, who all dedicated their front pages to Britain’s referendum.

Elsewhere, Germany's Spiegel said Brexit would be a 'triumph of cynicism over reason', adding 'were the British to leave the EU, it would be a threefold catastrophe: bad for Germany, bad for Britain and cataclysmic for Europe'.



PH

PH

Dutch newspaper AD urged Britons to vote for Remain, saying the European Union without the UK would be like 'tea without milk'.

Meanwhile, the Irish Independent said the UK can 'legitimately gripe about its view not being treated with due respect by Brussels' but insisted the country is better off in, and asked 'voters in Britain, whether they are Irish or not, to vote to Remain'.

In China, the Global Times, published by the ruling Communist Party's official People's Daily, warned Britain would lose its influence globally if voters backed Brexit.

