'There are no favourites' admits top pollster as he says Remain have squandered big lead

2016-06-16

Professor John Curtice has admitted the EU referendum is now "too close to call" with just a week left before the June 23 vote.

The Professor of Politics at the University of Strathclyde pointed to the latest poll which put Leave on 53 per cent while Remain lags behind on 47 per cent. 

The esteemed pollster told BBC's Daily Politics that after Thursday morning's polls "we no longer have a favourite in this referendum".

BBC

The staggering collapse in Remain support even prompted ex-Labour leader Andrew Kinnock to agree the two sides were "neck-and-neck".

Professor Curtice, one of the most reliable and respected voices in British political polling, added that "perhaps Leave are marginally favourites".

The stunning remarks come as the IPSOS Mori poll revealed a giant six-point swing in favour of Brexit from a month ago. 

Mr Curtice said, with a week to go until the referendum, "Leave have a narrow position of 53 per cent of the vote overall."

Leave had put Remain on the backfoot in the ongoing debate over Britain's place in the EU, Professor Curtice explained.

He said: "Remain have over-egged the pudding over the consequences if we vote to Leave.

"Only one in five of us believe that households will lose £4,300 and be permanently poorer after a Brexit – as George Osborne claims. 

"Very few of us believe we’ll be better off if we remain in the EU."





BBC

The latest poll, conducted for the Evening Standard, also noted that immigration had overtaken the economy as the most important issue to how the public will vote.

This coincides with a greater emphasis on immigration from the official Vote Leave campaign.

GETTY

Gideon Skinner of Ipsos MORI said: "The Leave campaign is getting their messages across, especially on the key public concern on immigration. "

More people also believe they will be better off in five years outside the EU than inside, despite Government warnings of severe consequences. 

