TV round-up: Jack Dee’s Referendum Help Desk and Euro 2016

2016-06-19

BBC

Its needed it. Having consumed hours of “debate” programmes which involved neither side contesting each other, bewildered viewers rushed to Jack Dee’s Referendum Help Desk (BBC2, Tuesday) for some much-needed light relief, and guidance. 

First, was an issue that many of us have failed to think about: cafe service. A middle-aged lady told Dee and his panel, including the rampantly funny Romesh Ranganathan, that her main reason for voting “Remain” was that upon returning to the UK from abroad she looks forward to buying a coffee: “I really like the service you get in coffee shops.” 

When the audience stopped laughing 10 minutes later, she revealed she was in dispute with her husband over the referendum. He must have been a tea drinker. So (shockingly), we could face a critical shortage of competent foreign-sounding baristas. Now I’m confused. 

Other perplexing issues were raised as we were encouraged to “make a suitably ill-informed decision”. That’s actually a given. Someone was worried about losing the Queen’s head off the currency. We’re voting about a republic now? Hang on. Dee, however, was adamant: “I want David Bowie on our money.”

Others was quite concerned about food. Aren’t we always? According to one, “wet mozzarella” might disappear in the event of Brexit, along with “Spanish omelettes you make yourself” and Italian-style gesticulation. I’m definitely out now. By far the funniest contribution came from one gentleman who suggested: “Shall we just leave to see what happens?” Or is that the equivalent of, “will the last person to leave please turn off the lights?”. 

Then I received a shock: four days away from the vote, Channel 4 featured a German standing by the White Cliffs of Dover. Typical, C4. Thankfully, he is our favourite German (in a one-horse race), comedian Henning Wehn – as in “Venn diagram” but no relation. His show, An Immigrants’ Guide To Britain (C4, Monday) was hilarious, done much in the style of Off Their Rockers by using foreigners to accost people in town centres. Polite locals would laugh nervously before sliding away. There’s a message there: don’t dwell in shopping precincts.

PH

The excellent Mishal Husain successfully stripped any laughter from the debate in Britain & Europe: The Immigration Question (BBC2, Wednesday). Her comic turn was Iain Duncan Smith, who really should give up any hope of opening at Saturday Night at the Palladium. Unless of course we do vote for Brexit.

He could then find there’s a spot for him hosting open mic night on the pier at Clacton. This was where the documentary began, slightly predictably, in the only constituency with a Ukip MP, Douglas Carswell. On a suitably glum day she eased along the seafront and summed up the decision facing us all: “To stay or to leave”, or as gameshow host Robert Kilroy-Silk once put it, more memorably, “to stick or to shaft”. 

Husain also talked to real people. Sonya had a family, along with a disabled husband, and was in no doubt about how she would be voting. 

She was “out” and with good reason it seemed. She was facing a 15-year wait on the housing list. But oddly Sonya concluded: “I don’t think my life would improve [after Brexit]. Hopefully for my children.” 

The film ended with a feature on how we could benefit from becoming health tourists. 

It’s easy. You go to Lanzarote, which from all reports still belongs to Spain, and develop a rather critical heart condition while lying in the sun and drinking sangria. It won’t be too trying. You are then dispatched to a hospital for wonderful health care, and your wife is flown there later at the expense of the health provider. 

You could see the new slogan for promoting The Canaries forming: “Enjoy Lanzarote with a heart attack”. It was left to journalist Rod Liddle to put the knife in, in his own inimical way: 

“The public knows more about immigration than the BBC.” And that’s from the former editor of the Today programme on Radio 4.

Now a quick guide to failing to understand football. Some new terms have crept into commentary for Euro 2016 (BBC1/ITV) that appear to mean nothing at all, which of course adds to our enjoyment. There’s “game management”, which in England’s case involves Roy Hodgson checking his watch to see if he’s missed the tea trolley, or there’s “pressing” which, even for a European championship, doesn’t involve olives or grapes, unfortunately.

And a goal can now be “scruffy”. It’s still a goal, apparently, but is in need of a bacterial wipe. We used to think “a game of two halves” was difficult to decipher. Now it seems like a piece of exquisite poetry. 

My favourite “describer” is Clive Tyldesley for ITV. He is incomparable. As France crept towards full-time in their latest match, he offered: “They will want to get through to half time without conceding a goal.” Concentration right to the very end, Clive. Well, almost.

The programme I truly wanted to ignore but found compelling was Food Unwrapped: Lose Weight for Summer (C4, Monday). We are now in the world of “negative calories”. For example, celery and cider vinegar. Serve with chips, only. They then discussed the “poo smoothie” with Gillian McKeith nowhere to be seen.

Finally, the “talking” gorilla, Koko (BBC1, Wednesday). In short, he didn’t. He can open a DVD case of the Nutcracker but that only suggests he enjoys charity shops.

