EU is "past its sell-by date", Scottish Vote Leave director says

2016-06-23

GETTY

Former UK minister Tom Harris, who is spearheading the Scottish Leave campaign, dismissed claims the institution had kept the continent from descending into conflict. 

He also insisted Nationalists' calls for sovereignty has been rendered "meaningless" by their support for the bloc. 

The ex-Labour MP highlighted how Holyrood ministers could not introduce alcohol minimum pricing even when they had a majority because it was blocked by a challenge in the European Court of Justice. 

His comments came during a frantic final day of campaigning ahead of the historic in-out referendum. 

SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon and Labour and Tory counterparts Kezia Dugdale and Ruth Davidson have urged Scots to Remain. 

Lib Dem chief Willie Rennie and the Greens are also committed to the EU. 

Speaking at Edinburgh Airport in a last push, Ms Sturgeon urged voters to turn out in large numbers to help "protect our place in the world". 

The First Minister warned the ballot was more than an "internal Tory disagreement" and accused Leave campaigners of "exploiting people's fears of immigration". 

GETTY

With UK-wide polls "too close to call" she insisted Scots could have a "big impact" and preserve the single market, jobs, and inward investment. 

She added: "I believe in independence for countries but I also believe independent countries must work together for the greater good. 

"These are all things at stake tomorrow. If we vote Remain we protect them if we don't vote Remain then we put all of these things at risk." 

And in an attack on Brexiteers she said the campaign should be "remembered for a positive result" and not "distasteful aspects of it that have focused on immigration and exploiting people's fears of immigration." 

Daily Express covers

Her predecessor Alex Salmond later describe the campaign as "toxic" and "poisonous", as he rejected comparisons with the 2014 independence debate. 

 It has been a pretty toxic campaign

Alex Salmond

Mr Salmond said on LBC Radio: "The Scottish referendum wasn't like that.. It doesn't mean everybody behaved perfectly during the Scottish referendum, that doesn't happen in politics. But for many people the Scottish referendum was a hugely uplifting experience. 

"I would say it has been a pretty toxic campaign, and the responsibility for that should be on the campaign leaders." 

Meanwhile, in a joint statement calling for Remain Holyrood leaders described the EU as "Project Peace" with "a precious legacy and a powerful example to the rest of the world". 

GETTY

But Scottish Vote Leave director Mr Harris said: "What kept the peace in Europe after the end of the Second World War was the Cold War and the role played by Nato. 

"Our time with the EU, whether its been productive or not, I think is past now. The EU is past its sell-by date, it's not necessary any more." 

Later attacking the European Court of Justice over minimum pricing he added: "Our politicians are fond of claiming they believe that the Scottish people are sovereign. 

"Yet by supporting our EU membership, those same politicians have shown that to be nothing more than a meaningless election slogan.

"Tomorrow we all have a choice: who is truly sovereign - the Scottish people or some unelected judges in Luxembourg?" 

But Professor Sir Harry Burns, former Chief Medical Officer for Scotland and a member of the Scotland Stronger in Europe advisory group, claimed the comments were a "distortion of the truth". He added: "Far from 'striking down' minimum pricing, the European Court of Justice actually said that it is for Scotland's own domestic courts to decide. 

"The reality of the EU is that it has taken significant action to drive up standards of public health, including air and water quality."

