Getting too big for his boots? Now Germany is fed-up with 'head of EU government' Juncker

2016-06-20

GETTY

Berlin was horrified at his recent trip to Russia - seen as a propaganda coup for Putin - and his remarks that the body he leads is a "political commission." 

This is in direct contradiction with  European treaties which state that the commission is nothing more than a "government agency."

German news magazine Spiegel commented: "Juncker sees himself as the head of a government - one who has made it his job to break agreements if it appears politically advantageous."

During the Greek debt crisis he supported Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras - even though the Commission is not one of Greece's creditors.

On refugees he wants to force EU member states to accept other countries' offers to provide police officers to help protect their borders and has threatened states with monetary penalties should they not accept  them.

And Juncker has begun making comments in public that make it seem as though he believes the growth and stability pact no longer applies.

"Because it's France," he recently answered when asked why he was allowing the country additional exceptions to the debt rules. 

Angela Merkel through the years

"A foolhardy thing to say," said one top EU diplomat of his comment.  

Spiegel went on; "Legal experts with the Council of the European Union consider Juncker's behaviour to be extremely problematic, as do many members of the Euro Group, which is made up of finance ministers from eurozone member states."

"If the rules are wrong, then we should change the rules instead of constantly violating them," says Philippe Lamberts, head of the Greens-European Free Alliance group in the European Parliament. 

"Of all people, Juncker should know what is at stake: Namely our credibility," says Gunther Krichbaum, European affairs expert for the CDU.

Bavarian Finance Minister Markus Söder, a member of the Christian Social Union, sister party to the CDU, warns: "Even the European Commission head is not allowed to simply ignore prevailing agreements.

 If the rules are wrong, then we should change the rules instead of constantly violating them

Philippe Lambert

"The same rules must apply to all, he says. There can't be a friends-and-family programme."

The Council of the EU, which represents the interests of the member states, has even accused Juncker of employing legally questionable methods. 

In a recent report obtained by Spiegel, Council legal experts wrote that there was no legal foundation for Juncker's decision in  May to delay pending penalties levied on Spain and Portugal for their excessive budget deficits.  

"It is a significant slap in the face for the Commission president," said the magazine.

It added: "Prior to taking his current position, Juncker had no experience leading a gigantic administration like the European Commission -- another fact that helps explain his desire to operate in a more political manner. 

GETTY

In Luxembourg, he directed a state ministry with just a few dozen employees, now he is leading an apparatus of 30,000 people, the equivalent of 6 percent of the population of Luxembourg.

"Juncker also looks as though he is not in the best of health and hardly a minute goes by without him reaching for another cigarette. The news website Politico recently wrote about his alcohol consumption."

German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble wants to absolve Juncker of his responsibility for overseeing the solidity of member-state finances. 

"A Commission that sees itself in a political light could be biased," said Schäuble's parliamentary state secretary Jens Spahn in Brussels recently. 

GETTY

"If Juncker starts meddling in competition issues, that would cross the red line," says an EU official.

The magazine added: "A not insignificant number of people in Brussels believes that the success of the Brexit camp in the UK can partly be blamed on Juncker.

"Some conservative political leaders think that Juncker has unnecessarily given ammunition to the Brexiteers and has also strengthened Euroskepticism in Germany."

"Jean-Claude Juncker's romanticism about Europe no longer works in the 21st century," says one high-ranking German conservative to spiegel. 

If Brexit comes to pass, he says, Europe would need a new narrative. "I have my doubts that Juncker would be able to embody it."

