Brexit: Will Britain leave the EU? Latest polls, odds and predictions

2016-06-23

Getty

Remain were narrowly ahead with 52% to Leave's 48%, according to the final YouGov survey of 5,000 people on polling day. 

But the result is still "too close to call" with Leave at 45%, only just ahead of Remain at 44%, according to a poll from Opinium Research released on Wednesday.

Now "everything rests" on the 9% still undecided over which way to vote today, said Opinium, which canvassed more than 3,000 people. 

Another poll, by TNS, showed the Brexit campaign had surged ahead with Leave at 43%, Remain at 41% and undecided voters and those who will not vote at 16%. 

Once people's likelihood to vote was taken into account, TNS put the voting intention figure at a staggering 49% for Leave and 42% for Remain. 

Most of the recent polls showed that the Remain side had won back ground after the Brexit camp took a clear lead in the polls last week. 

YouGov's eve-of-poll prediction put Remain just ahead at 51% with Leave at 49%. HOW IMPORTANT WILL TURNOUT BE?

The shift towards pro-EU side came over the weekend after Labour MP Jo Cox was shot and stabbed to death on Thursday June 16.

An ORB poll found support for Remain at 53%, up five percentage points on the previous one, with support for Leave at 46 percent, down three points.

Too close to call in final #EUref poll: Leave 45% Remain 44%. Everything rests on 9% still undecided. [sample:3,000] https://t.co/BXhLPZjNAa

YouGov eve-of-vote poll: REMAIN 51, LEAVE 49 https://t.co/XAi4j3D4Vo pic.twitter.com/T27GyVlZyg

Political strategist Lynton Crosby said: "All the signs of ORB's latest and final poll point to a referendum that will truly come down to the wire.”

It came after the Leave campaign achieved an incredible six-point lead over the Remain side in a key poll revealed on Thursday June 16. 

Among those most likely to vote, 52% will choose to Remain and 48% will choose to Leave, according to the final Ipsos MORI poll results released today. 

This result marked a dramatic turnaround from its last poll which showed that 53% of people wanted to leave the EU and 47% wanted to stay, excluding undecided voters.

The telephone survey, carried out between June 11 and 14, found that immigration has now overtaken the economy as the most important issue for voters. 

Ipsos MORI head of political research Gideon Skinner said: “The Leave campaign is getting their messages across, especially on the key public concern on immigration.  

“But the Remain camp is finding it much harder to convince people that their core economic messages, both on the risks of Brexit and the benefits of staying, is going to have a personal impact on their lives.”   

A YouGov survey gave Brexiteers a seven point lead over Remain, while an ICM poll and ORB pollsters put Leave ahead last week.  

Bookmakers have slashed the odds on Brexit after a surge in punters putting their money on Britain voting to quit the EU. 

For example, William Hill’s Leave odds were Leave priced at 4/1 and Remain odds stood at 1/6 as of 6pm on polling day. 

William Hill spokesman Graham Sharpe said: “We are taking a higher percentage of individual bets for 'Leave' than ever before, and a significantly lower percentage of the overall stake money is for 'Remain' than for nearly two months.” 

Under-fire Tory leader David Cameron has been priced at 5/2 to step down as prime minister before the end of June. 

Before Eurosceptics start the celebrations early, it is worth remembering that pollsters have been wrong in past. 

In the 2015 general election, the opinion polls got the result badly wrong because they predicted a dead heat between the political parties.

In actual fact the Conservatives were on track to win a majority, taking 331 seats, compared to 232 for Labour, on election night.



Before the Scottish referendum in 2014, the polls indicated strong support for Scotland to remain in the UK until the last month before the vote. 

The vote for independence then gained momentum and closed the gap, but in the end Scotland voted against quitting the UK. 

Luke Taylor, the head of social and political attitudes at pollster TNS, said there was great uncertainty around the result because many Britons remain undecided or do not plan to vote.

“Our latest poll suggests that Leave is in a stronger position than Remain," Mr Taylor said on the eve of polling day.

"But it should be noted that in the Scottish Independence Referendum and the 1995 Quebec Independence Referendum there was a late swing to the status quo and it is possible that the same will happen here.” 

-

A map, created by search giant Google, shows that most British people are searching for what happens if we “leave” the EU, not if we “stay” in. 

Google's research breaks down searches for “leave” the EU or “stay” during the seven days between May 31 and June 7 2016.

WHAT WOULD HAPPEN IF BRITAIN LEAVES THE EU?

