Stock market CARNAGE amid fears the world is heading for recession

2016-06-16

GETTY

Britain's FTSE 100 tumbled by almost one per cent in the opening minutes of trading, and is now hovering at a three-month low. It's feared the index could plunge further if the Bank of England uses today's interest rate update to issue yet more scare-mongering warnings over Britain's vote over European Union membership. Stock markets have already witnessed huge losses over the past week amid concern over the stability of the eurozone if Britain votes to leave on June 23. Investors have been further spooked after America's central bank gave a gloomy update overnight and Asian stock markets also suffered huge losses. Now trading screens are flashing red across Europe, with German and French stock markets also plunging this morning.

The London Stock Exchange

The US Federal Reserve downgraded economic forecasts and said its likely to raise interest rates slower than previously thought. The most recent jobs figures from the US were the worst in six years, and experts are warning the world's biggest economy could now be heading for a downturn. Stock markets in China closed down today with Japan's Nikkei losing a heavy 3.1 per cent. Amid concern for the world economy, investors have piled into the Japanese yen as it's considered a safe haven for money. But a sharp rise in the currency could tip Japan's fragile economy into recession as its heavily dependent on exports.

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

Connor Campbell, financial analyst at Spreadexcom, said: "With a rather negative Federal Reserve holding off on a June rate-hike, and stating that it expects a ‘slower path’ for any future rise, the markets had little reason for cheer this Thursday, the European markets returning to the red after yesterday’s dead cat bounce."Dropping 50 points after the bell the FTSE is now circling 4 month lows, threatening to take out that 5900 level before the day is out. He added: "The FTSE could well see its losses intensify as the day goes on with the Bank of England set to stoke those Brexit-fearing fires later this morning with a firmer warning against leaving the EU (the central bank is also expected to unsurprisingly keep interest rates on hold)."

