Former military chief switches to Leave campaign over 'DISASTROUS EU army' fears

2016-06-18

GETTY

Lord Guthrie has spoken of his fears surrounding a potential “European army” and claimed severing ties with the bloc would be “better for defence”.

This comes despite the Government promising it would “never be part of an EU army”.

Lord Guthrie, who was the professional head of the British Army between 1994 and 1997, had previously put his name down on a letter calling for Britain to stay in the Union.

GETTY

But the military veteran has now claimed that was “a mistake” and urged British voters to abandon Jean-Claude Juncker’s band of Brussels bureaucrats.

The original letter, which originated in Downing Street, argued that the EU was an “increasingly important pillar of our security”.

It cited the growing threats faced from the likes of Islamic State, Russian nationalism and Middle East instability as reasons Britain should stick with Brussels.

GETTY

The letter said: “Britain will have to confront these challenges whether it is inside or outside the EU. But within the EU, we are stronger.”

But Cameron’s Eurocratic crew has now been dealt a major blow from Field Marshal Lord Guthrie, who described the prospect of an EU army as “disastrous”.

He told the Daily Telegraph: “I think a European army could damage Nato. It is expensive.

“It's unnecessary duplication to have it. It would appeal to some Euro vanity thing.

"There's a feeling that those backing the European army are doing it for political reasons rather than military ones.

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

“They want to be able to boast, 'Look! We've got a European army'. That is dangerous.”

In April, a military police unit carried out European Union-funded special training, ready to be deployed in the event of civil unrest or war.

GETTY

The training, which took place in the German North Rhine-Westphalia province was designed to prepare troops as part of the EU’s Lowlands Gendarmerie programme.

The military police group is made up of seven European nations, including Spain, Romania, Poland and Germany, and aims to quell post conflict scenarios within EU member states.

