Gambling in the Army EXPOSED: MoD should ban 'crack cocaine' slot machines from barracks

2016-06-20

GETTY

Dubbed the 'crack cocaine' of gambling beacuse of their highly-addictive format, the machines are an accepted feature of bookmakers, pubs and casinos across the country.

But the games, which include roulette and poker, can encourage gamblers to spend huge amounts of money with little chance of winning.

And the same terminals, which have earned themselves a dubious reputation for preying on gambling addicts, are also widely found on British Army bases, it has emerged.

Several officers currently working for the British Army have raised concerns about their presence, saying it is "ridiculous" that the machines are placed inside barracks.

Critics say the machines are placed near ATMs and they are leaving forces personnel with addictions that persist long after retirement from the army.

Those suffering from Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) are deemed to be particularly susceptible to a gambling addiction.

One serving officer described seeing colleagues blow "hundreds of pounds" in one go on the terminals.

Staff sergeant Mike Owens said: "The Army is always making a big deal about 'duty of care' to its soldiers.

"Why then do slot machines feature prominently in so many communal areas?"

Prince Harry at the Afghanistan war commemorations

Others say accessing help to stop gambling is difficult as regular deployments away from home mean attending appointments or group meetings can be impossible.

Senior Army officials insist gambling machines are closely monitored and the dangers of gambling are briefed to the soldiers, with help offered to those who need it.

Lt Col Charlie Battey, Commanding Officer, 26 Engineer Regiment, said: "The hub at Swinton Barracks is intended to be an environment that resembles similar commercial venues outside the wire where soldiers can relax, unwind and enjoy themselves.

"This includes the presence of games machines, television and a bar.

"Every effort is made to ensure the former are used in moderation."

GETTY

But another unnamed serviceman refuted Lt Col Battey's claim that monitoring takes place, writing in Soldier magazine: "There is none that I know of.

"It should happen though because the sheer number of them situated throughout MoD sites is ridiculous in my opinion.

"I have seen first hand, soldiers putting hundreds of pounds into these contraptions and getting absolutely nothing in return.

"They play day-after-day with the mindset of 'it's due to pay out soon'.

"Not surprisingly, payday weekend is the busiest period for these machines.

"They encourage gambling addiction so if the MoD is serious about reintegrating soldiers into civilian society in good health and minus any destructive habits these devices need to be removed."

GETTY

Bookmakers can make hundreds of thousands of pounds from slot machines and Fixed Odds Betting Terminals, with the issue now widely acknowledged as a problem affecting the civilian population.

But little has been known until now about the effect on those serving in the military, who often turn to on-site gambling machines because they are limited in their recreation options.

The Responsible Gambling Trust (RGT), a leading charity campaigning to raise awareness of the issue, said there was an "obligation" on the Government to offer military personnel "the best possible care during and after their service".

Hosting gambling machines on military barracks also appears to contravene government guidelines on the behaviour of soldiers in the British Army.

The Queen's Regulations, the set of rules which govern the conduct of serving military personnel, state that "all forms of gambling and bookmaking are forbidden in units".

The MoD, which refers to the terminals simply as 'amusements with prizes' (AWPs), insists there is no evidence to show that gambling addictions affect serving personnel more commonly than the civilian population.

Asked why they are installed on military bases, a spokesperson said they are low-bet machines with a £100 maximum win, unlike the high-stakes devices commonly found in bookies, and that the Queen's Regulations say that on-site gambling is allowed at the discretion of each bases's commanding officer.

But Dr Jane Rigbye, RGT's director of harm minimisation, said: "Evidence from around the world raises a legitimate concern that military personnel may be particularly vulnerable to gambling-related harm.

"We would urge those in command of them to make their troops aware of the support and advice they can access through GambleAware.co.uk, and encourage them to seek help if they need it, without fear of any disciplinary repercussions.

"Our armed forces do a vital job in defending us and there is an obligation, on all those who rely on their protection, to ensure we offer them the best possible care during and after their service."

Polish troops land with parachutes at the military compound near Torun, central Poland as part of the NATO Anaconda-16 military exercise

The MoD is also now facing calls to treat compulsive gambling as a health problem in the same way that alcohol and drug dependent are.

Sergeant Stew Duffus who has suffered a gambling addiction for the past 20 years despite tours of Afghanistan and Iraq, said the condition was worse than substance misuse.

He said: "When you take those you go to another place - you're drunk or high - but when you're gambling you know you shouldn't be doing it but you carry on anyway.

"Once you've lost all of your money the mental strain is horrendous because you start thinking about what you need to pay for."

GamCare, which offers information and advice for anyone suffering a gambling problem, said free counselling services are available to Armed Forces personnel who need support, and their online services can be accessed while on deployment.

A spokesperson for the charity said: "We often find that problem gamblers experience a range of triggers, which could include boredom, loneliness, anger, stress and depression.

"For many of our counselling clients, gambling problems have developed as a method of escape from pressures elsewhere in their lives.

"This may a particular concern for Armed Services personnel who are regularly in stressful situations."

An MoD spokesperson added: "There is absolutely no evidence to suggest gambling issues are more prevalent within the Defence community than in wider society.

"We offer a wide range of mental health support to all personnel, and work closely with our charitable partners to support those who experience problems with gambling."

