'We don’t see him' Jean-Claude Juncker blasted over 'lacklustre' work calendar

2016-06-16

GETTY 

EU senior officials have been forced to admit they “can’t remember the last time” they saw Mr Juncker after it emerged he attends 0.82 external meetings and events per day on average.

Embarrassing figures show the beleaguered former president of Luxembourg has shown his face at 487 external meetings and events since his first day in office 594 days ago.  

His not over-burdensome workload prompted European officials to reveal Mr Juncker has created a “depressed” EU and often sticks to his comfort zone. 

Some even question whether the EU boss is up to the task of running a troubled state, blighted by fears of Brexit, an escalating migrant crisis and economic woes. 



GETTY 

 Many Brussels officials say they can’t remember the last time they saw him

EU senior diplomat

A EU senior diplomat admitted: “We don’t see him”. 

He added: “From border fences to Brexit to the economy, Juncker’s Commission has struggled to plough a path out of the malaise. 

“The truth is we don’t see him. People don’t complain here because he is not indispensable to the everyday functioning of the EU. We sometimes don’t notice his absence. 

“Many Brussels officials say they can’t remember the last time they saw him. 

Tory MP Geoffrey Van Orden said: “He only really wants to listen to people who agree with the Euro-federalist line and the rest he regards as mavericks and populists.”

European Commission figures obtained by political news website Politico also show Mr Juncker has enjoyed a 27 day holiday in August 2015 and practically doesn’t work on Monday’s because he has enjoyed 25 four-day weekends without any engagements. 

GETTY 

The EU boss has also raised eyebrows over his frequent visits [55 times] to the original six EU countries in comparison to 11 visits inside Europe and eight outside. 

Another EU official added: “He is less and less positive about the EU and the abilities of the member states in particular. 

“You can say he is EU-depressed. He has decided simply to focus hard on a few things, especially migration and Greece. The rest doesn’t matter to him.”

But insiders in the former Luxembourg premier’s close circle remain confident he is the man for the job, after taking over the Commission at a time when Europe was still reeling from a debt crisis. 

Jumping to his defence, his aides say: “President Juncker devised the new structure of the Commission so as to focus on the big issues that require presidential attention, namely the refugee crisis and the Greek crisis for example.” 



A spokesman for the EU Commission added: "Anyone who actually knows the President knows he is the longest in the office and the most reluctant to take time off – always found in the office on bank holidays and only taking short breaks in the summer - certainly fewer than his closest staff.

"In 2015 he was only away from Brussels for 2 weeks and in any case was permanently on the phone and continuing to work as Presidents don't ever get time off."

A spokesman said the EU commission only publishes external meetings and meetings with visitors in the public calendar, adding: “There are of course scores more internal meetings not in the online dairy”. 

And the Brussels’ fat cat’s health has also been thrown into the debate, with some suggesting the president has become frail since starting his term. 

GETTY

But others insist he is fully in control of his responsibilities. 

European Parliament Vice President Antonio Tajani told Politico: “Terrorism, illegal immigration, the euro crisis, Brexit. It’s not easy to be leader of the European Commission.”

It comes as Mr Juncker is expected to wade in to debate over Britain’s future with the European Union ahead of next week’s historic referendum.  

He is set to launch a desperate bid to keep Britain in the 28-nation state, while several polls showed the Leave camp comfortably ahead. 

