FREXIT: Now Marine Le Pen demands MORE EU referendums following historic British vote

2016-06-22

GETTY 

Le Pen has promised France its own EU referendum on Wednesday, as she threw her weight behind Brexit just a day before Britons went to the polls.

The National Front leader repeated her previous calls for a “Frexit” following the historic vote – which saw the Leave campaign win more than 52 per cent of the votes.  

She tweeted: “Victory to liberty! As I have been demanding for many years, we now need the same referendum in France and EU countries.”

Her comments echoed those of her niece, Marion Le Pen, who called for the country to emulate the British Leave campaign’s success and leave the EU. 

She tweeted: “From #Brexit to #Frexit: It is now the time to bring democracy to our country. French citizens should have the right to choose!”

TWITTER

National Front leader Le Pen said Thursday’s historic EU referendum was a clear indication the 28-nation bloc was “decaying”, as she vowed to give her own countrymen the choice should she elected to the Elysee Palace.

She said: “I would vote for Brexit, even if I think that France has a thousand more reasons to leave than the UK. 

“Because we have the euro and Schengen. Whatever the result, it shows the EU is decaying, that there are cracks everywhere.”

Her vow is likely to heighten fears a Brexit could lead to the entire break-up of Europe.

GETTY 

 I would vote for Brexit, even if I think that France has a thousand more reasons to leave than the UK

Marine Le Pen

Miss Le Pen has previously praised David Cameron for pledging to hold a referendum on EU membership and forcing the European Commission to “cede to the demands” of Britain. 

The anti-immigration party has vowed to hold a vote just six months after it wins power during the presidential elections next year. 

Miss Le Pen said the the part would force the bloc to hand “border control, budgetary, legislative and monetary sovereignty” back to France. 

This week she said the “totalitarian” bloc were to blame for rising high unemployment, low growth and uncontrolled immigration. 

She added: “So let’s get around a table and create a Europe of the nations.” 

The far-right leader is said to be twice as popular as current French president, Francois Hollande, according to a latest poll. 

GETTY

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

GETTY 

The results represent a damning verdict on Hollande’s four year socialist experiment, which has been marred by resigning unemployment and a stalling economy. 

France will elect its next president in a two-round election in April and May next year, with only the two top candidates progressing to the all-important run-off in the second round. 

Miss Le Pen, who has been compared to Donald Trump and Nigel Farage, has seen a massive surge in her poll numbers which could put her on course for a place in the second round and possibly an against-all-odds victory. 

