‘A lot of people are here illegally’ UK-based Europeans speak out on eve of Brexit vote

2016-06-22

REUTERS

With one day of campaigning left ahead of the EU referendum Europeans have shared their views on the debate which has been dominated by migration. 

Mihai Marcar, a Romanian waiter at a garden centre restaurant, wants to stay in Britain come whatever the election result.

He said: ”As soon as I came here, I was in love with the British way of life. This 'hello, how are you? Thank you very much', it attracted me very much. This British gentleman style.”

 I think there are a lot of people who are here illegally. For me that's the real problem, not the people who are working here, paying taxes, having a normal life

Mihai Marcar

Mr Marcar said he has been dismayed by the negative tone of much of the debate about immigration, particularly from eastern Europe. 

He feels hard-working, productive people are being unfairly stigmatised because of a minority who are not like that.

He said: ”I think there are a lot of people who are here illegally. For me that's the real problem, not the people who are working here, paying taxes, having a normal life."

REUTERS

Catarina Cardoso, a Portuguese academic specialising in climate change, says the EU referendum debate has made a difference to how she feels about being an immigrant.

Mrs Cardoso, who lives in London with her German husband and three children, said: ”Until now we were the same as everyone else, maybe a different accent, but it didn't seem to be an issue.

"Now you don't know whether you're welcome."

REUTERS

Mrs Cardoso said the family had not previously considered leaving “but if Britain exits the EU then I suppose we'll have to think about it”.

Others are concerned their children will lose out on schooling if Britain leaves the EU.

Simeon Simeonov, came to Britain with his Bulgarian wife to give their two children a chance for a better life. His main fear about Brexit is that it might stop them from continuing their education at a local British state school.

REUTERS

Discussing the Brexit campaign, he said: "They're thinking like in the last century.”

Others are concerned how Brexit will affect their businesses and freedom of movement. 

Monika Cyrek, a Polish national who works in a grocery store run by her mother selling mostly Polish products, said: "If we're not wanted here, probably a lot of people will leave and try other places.

“I don't know if it will make it harder for us to bring goods from Poland.”

REUTERS

When Raluca Cioroianu was growing up in Communist Romania, it was difficult to travel abroad, but as an adult, after her country joined the EU, she was able to move to Britain where she has built a good life for herself.

Miss Cioroianu, who works as a shop supervisor at a pick-your-own farm on the outskirts of London, said: "If you were a teenager from the UK, you could just take your passport and go. We couldn't do that.

"I came here with good intentions, to work, to pay taxes, to improve my knowledge, my culture, and to make a better life. I’m not ashamed to say that I'm from Romania."

Musician Jessie Grimes, an Irish clarinettist, is concerned that a post-EU Britain may have to re-instate border controls between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland.

She said: "I can't see that going peacefully.”

Miss Grimes also cares about gay rights and says it would be a shame for Britain, which allows gay marriage and adoption, to lose the possibility of influencing less progressive EU nations.

She said: ”You can only do good by staying.”

Uniquely among non-British EU nationals, Irish citizens living in Britain are allowed to vote in the referendum, and Miss Grimes has cast her postal ballot to Remain.

REUTERS

Svenja Schumacher, a German national working for a London financial services firm, wishes she could vote. 

She said: ”I don't think it's fair that I don't have a vote. I pay taxes in Britain.

"When I was at school I had student exchanges with France, Italy, Spain. We learnt quite a few European languages. We learnt about the EU, European law, the whole set-up.

"Here the discussions you read in the press are mainly about what economic benefits Britain takes out of the EU and not what the EU stands for, things like freedom, security, solidarity."

REUTERS

REUTERS

Vera Pereira, a Portuguese double bass player with a British orchestra, worries about the impact a Brexit would have on Britain's music scene, one of its main attractions for her.

She said: "Orchestras may not be able to tour as much. I'm afraid other countries in Europe won't listen to British orchestras as often and the world of music in Britain won't be as well-known as it is now. In 20 years we'll see the result.”

Paolo Esposito, an Italian national working in financial services, says moving to Britain was easier than changing his gym. 

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

He has "zero concern" about attitudes towards European residents changing in the event of a Brexit because of the welcoming, cosmopolitan character of London, where he lives.

He said: ”I wasn't expecting it to be so easy to settle. From simple things like bureaucracy, which is a lot more straightforward than in Italy, to people's attitudes towards foreigners. Looking back on it, it was less hassle than changing your gym.

"I'm definitely settled, with a ring, a mortgage, a British baby."

