We should be proud of making June 23rd our INDEPENDENCE DAY, says NIGEL FARAGE

2016-06-24

GETTY

To vote for a Britain free to make its own laws, control its own borders and act in its own national interest. It has been a long and sometimes lonely road. I remember making the arguments decades ago that we would be better off leaving the European Union and many dismissing and scoffing at the arguments I was putting forward. 

Taking on the establishment and challenging consensus is certainly a rough old game. But it was always abundantly clear to me that the European Union was a total disaster for our country and that we had to leave. Today we sadly see a Eurozone in utter crisis, a single currency crippling countries and causing human suffering on a horrific scale. 

Many in places like Greece have seen democracy crushed and the well-being of their people ignored just so that the European Union can continue with its Euro project. We see a migrant crisis that the EU has failed to deal with in any credible way, exposing its inability to deal with the problems of the modern world.

It’s Common Asylum Policy which along with Angela Merkel encouraged all who wanted to come to Europe to come has caused enormous problems and demonstrates how fundamentally flawed this Union is. The European Union is a sinking, failed project. That is why Thursday’s vote mattered so much. 

Because no matter what the Remain side said, if we had voted to stay inside the EU, membership would have dragged us down, held us back, stopped us as a country from fulfilling our true potential. Remain would have meant we would have been dragged into an EU army, into further Eurozone bailouts and an extending of open borders as the likes of Turkey and others joined.

Brexit: What to expect next

The British people’s vote to Leave was one for a better Britain, for change. It marked a landmark moment in our country’s history when ordinary, decent patriotic British folk took on the rich bankers, the corporate elite and had the courage to vote for their country.

We heard the threats, we heard the ridiculous scare stories about world wars and apocalyptic visions, but the British people stood tall and refused to be bullied and threatened by the political class who have let so many in our country down so badly. 

All those who supported continued membership could muster was fear. They did not lay out why they believed in completely open borders. They denied plans for an EU army. Even those who supported remaining locked inside the EU did not champion this Union because they too know it has failed. 

Their uninspiring doomsday scenarios were a stark contrast to the vision we had on the Brexit side of a bold, modern Britain free and able to make its own decisions, in control of its own future. I think that this whole debate boiled down to one very fundamental question: whether or not you believed in Britain. 

You only had to listen to the likes of Nick Clegg and George Osborne to hear their lack of faith in us as a country to blaze our own trail in the world. But I have always believed that we are a great country with amazing global links, and this vote now gives us the opportunity to the re-engage with the rest of the world. 

GETTY

It gives us back the right to represent our own national interest, rather than us having to rely on unelected EU bureaucrats to represent us. We are better than that. And undoubtedly this was a vote for our ability to self-govern, for our own British Parliament to once again be the place that holds ultimate power in our country rather than the institutions of the European Union. 

For too long we have allowed the majority of our laws to have been made by those we cannot vote for, who we cannot get rid of, EU officials most people have never even heard of determining the laws we live by. This was a vote for a stronger democracy, a prouder democracy and one which will now allow our Parliament to go back to making the big decisions. 

GETTY

Whether you agree or disagree with what a government is doing, your right to re-elect them or reject those in power at the ballot box is of absolutely vital importance. This is after all what past generations sacrificed so much before to preserve and protect. From going around the country I have met so many people who assured me of their support in this referendum campaign. 

Good, decent folk angry and let down by the establishment’s support for complete and total open borders. So many families have seen their living standards fall due to the oversupply of unskilled cheap labour. They’ve seen their communities change and increasing pressure on local schools, hospitals and housing.

By voting to Leave these people have demanded that Britain takes back control of its borders and starts controlling migration rather than continuing along a path of record high net migration running at a third of a million year after year. Crucially, outside of the EU it will now be debated in the British Parliament and decided by a British government what rate of migration we deem to be suitable and beneficial for Britain. 

Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), makes a statement after Britain voted to leave on the European Union

I must thank the Daily Express and the many readers of this newspaper who have been part of the pro-Brexit movement, spreading the word and doing all they can to help get our country back. As I’ve been around the country campaigning I’ve seen the Express car stickers, the posters on windows and of course I’ve read the paper and seen particularly over the last week some brilliant front pages backing Brexit loudly and proudly. 

This newspaper has stood with UKIP in helping to break the mould of British politics. The Daily Express was front and centre of this campaign, ahead of its time, helping make the argument that our best days were ahead of us as an independent, self-governing nation. That vision is one which we can now begin to realise. It is hugely exciting for our country. 

GETTY

I’d also like to express my personal gratitude to Richard Desmond for the support and loyalty he’s shown me. We together have helped change British politics forever. We together have truly made history. All of you who voted to Leave on Thursday are part of this and should stand with your heads held high. 

That more than 17 million people voted to Leave the European Union just shows you the huge progress we have made over the years in winning this most important of all debates. I am absolutely delighted. We now must look towards the future with a global vision and as a proud, outward-looking nation. 

June 23rd was our Independence Day and one we should all savour and be mightily proud of making a reality.

