City set for reaction to vote to leave

2016-06-19

GETTY

As the UK’s membership of the European Union gets put to a referendum, banks, brokers, investment managers and other City firms are set to work through the night to tackle the fallout, with trading expected to be volatile. 

The first results are expected in at 00:30am on Friday morning and the majority of results will be known by 5am. 

Moneycorp chief executive Mark Horgan said: “The vote itself has been priced into the market, but what has not is an exit. The initial reaction to a Leave victory could be sterling falling 20 per cent. It would immediately spike downwards, before gradually correcting.” 

Goldman Sachs managing director Bobby Vedral said that having spoken to hundreds of clients, he believes that Brexit is a wellflagged risk that many have not acted to avoid. 

As a result, a vote to Leave could take many in the market by surprise and lead to shares in the UK and Europe plummeting. 

“The first reaction will most likely focus on selling or shorting [betting that prices will fall] UK assets, but it will soon become clear that this is a European problem,” he said. 

“Market participants are most focused on UK-centric assets, but not so much on the shockwave to Europe, but that will change fast.” 

GETTY

He added that in such an event, the Bank of England and the European Central Bank would have to enact emergency measures to calm panicking markets: “Central banks, and first and foremost the Bank of England, but also others, will likely stand ready to shore up sentiment, with probable support in the government bond and maybe the corporate credit sector.” 

However Panmure Gordon market commentator David Buik said: “I think it is the establishment that has exacerbated market volatility as nothing has changed on the fundamentals side for two years. The fact remains that growth looks brittle in the US, China and the EU and I believe that is responsible for the market gyrations we’ve seen.” 

Patrick Minford, co-chair of Economists For Brexit, said: “The gloomy consensus is wrong about Brexit because it uses bad models and the wrong assumptions.” 

According to TNS, 46 per cent of small to medium sized enterprises (SMEs) believe that Brexit would be best for business, compared to 56 per cent who back remain. 

On Tuesday the Office for National Statistics will publish the latest public sector finance figures, which are expected to show Government borrowing for May fell by £1billion to £9.2billion compared to May 2015. 

Henderson Global ­Investors chief economist Simon Ward said: “The last numbers were not encouraging and the consensus view is that as the economy is slowing, tax receipts could undershoot expectations.”

