Outrage at plot to RAISE our taxes: Osborne 'is FINISHED' over EU punishment budget plan

2016-06-16

GETTY

Furious Tory MPs said his credibility heading the Treasury had been “destroyed” by his plan to impose punishing tax hikes and spending cuts if voters decide to quit the EU next week.

Sixty-five Tory MPs signed a joint statement opposing Mr Osborne’s plans for a Brexit emergency Budget of swingeing austerity measures, effectively killing any prospect of getting such a package through the Commons.

The statement said: “If he were to proceed with these proposals, the Chancellor’s position would become untenable.”

Privately, senior Tories called for Mr Osborne to be removed from the Treasury following the EU referendum, whatever the result, because of his “scaremongering”.

One senior Tory said: “Osborne is finished. He cannot deliver another Budget. His credibility is destroyed.”

Another said: “The Chancellor’s reputation has been hugely damaged.”

 There would have to be an emergency budget to fill a £30billion black hole

George Osborne

And in a BBC Question Time special last night, Justice Secretary Michael Gove refused to say whether he wanted Mr Obsorne to stay as Chancellor after the vote.

Asked if he would back Mr Osborne’s planned Brexit Budget, Mr Gove said: “No.” When asked if he thought Mr Osborne should keep his job he avoided the question and refused to lend support .

Mr Osborne stood shoulder to shoulder with former Labour chancellor Lord Darling to sound the alarm about potential economic impact from a Brexit yesterday.

Speaking at a Hitachi train plant in Ashford, Kent, they claimed a Brexit-triggered slump could leave a £30billion hole in public finances that could only be filled by tax rises and spending cuts.



Mr Osborne said: “A vote to leave would hurt businesses, hurt investment and cost jobs. There would be difficult decisions – decisions that begin next Friday.

"There would have to be an emergency Budget to fill a £30billion black hole.

“Today we are setting out the difficult decisions we would have to take.”

Under his plans, the basic rate of income tax would rise from 20p to 22p, the middle-income rate by 3p to 43p and inheritance tax would soar.

Lord Darling said: “There would not just be one emergency Budget, there would be one after the other. The Chancellor would have to consider cuts to the NHS and schools if we leave.”

In an interview with the BBC, Mr Osborne said: “You cannot have chaos in your public finances. We would have to take necessary measures to deal with huge instability in our economy.”

Tory MPs warned the proposals would scrap a string of manifesto pledges including vows not to raise income tax or cut NHS spending.

GETTY

Ex-ministers Liam Fox, Iain Duncan Smith, Cheryl Gillan and John Redwood signed the statement condemning a Brexit Budget.

It said: “We find it incredible the Chancellor could seriously be threatening to renege on so many pledges.

“If the Chancellor is serious we cannot possibly allow this to go ahead.”

Mr Duncan Smith said: “Of all the things the Remain camp has done, this is probably the most bizarre and the most ridiculous. It’s shocking behaviour, more irresponsible than I’ve seen from any Chancellor at any time. He appears to be talking the economy down in the hope that will panic everybody, panic the markets and force people to vote Remain because they’ll be so scared.”

GETTY

Vote Leave’s Matthew Elliott said: “George Osborne’s reckless teenage temper tantrum has proved a step too far. Threatening to vandalise the economy has led to his MPs effectively declaring no confidence in him.”

Ladbrokes yesterday cut the odds on Mr Osborne leaving his job this year from 5-1 to 5-2.

