WATCH: Jeremy Paxman left incredulous as Sandie Shaw argues EU’s benefits to music career

2016-06-23

The jaw-dropping moment happened after an ad-break on the final EU debate aired tonight on Channel Four.

As the ex-Newsnight presenter was talking the Puppet on a String singer interrupted him by continually saying “excuse me”.

A visibly irritated Paxman said “oh, go on then!”

The Eurovision Song Contest winner went on to talk about the link between culture, the economy and spiritism.

She also went on a long, sprawling discussion about how the EU has benefited the music business.



Channel Four 

After Paxman bellowed "get to the point", journalist Julia Hartley-Brewer shouted: “We’re here to talk about the security of our nation, not your music career!”As the audience cheered Paxman turned his back on Shaw and continued the debate.

On Twitter Piers Morgan blasted the 60s pop icon, saying: “This Channel 4 debate is a complete farce. Paxman’s lost control and Sandie Shaw’s bonkers.” 

Music artists, politicians and TV celebs were some of the 150 people involved in the final EU debate after the leader of Ukip Nigel Farage dropped out at the last minute citing “family reasons”.

Viewers were left confused whether they were watching Jeremy Paxman or Jeremy Kyle as the debate simply became “childish”.





Channel Four 

The panels were regularly talking over each other during the debate leading to a Twitter user claiming it had “the gravitas of a Jeremy Kyle paternity test.”

Another Twitter user said: “It’s all very childish. #c4debate could almost be Jeremy Kyle” and another said: 'Is Jeremy Paxman standing in for Jeremy Kyle'.”

During the debate, television personality Katie Price admitted she had never voted before and the debate was only confusing her further. 



Channel Four 



She said: “I came here confused and I am still confused.”

Leave voter and Cameron’s adviser Steve Hilton reminded the audience that leaving the EU would allow us to take more of a global role. 

While Labour's Yvette Cooper admitted that immigration reforms are needed and claimed the Leave campaign has been “just not British” and pitting “humans against humans”.

Former MP Anne Widdecombe said: “Control of our borders is a massive issue for Britain and it doesn’t mean closing the borders.

“We should decide the numbers we accept and be able to require people to go back.” 

Getty

Mr Paxman highlighted that the undecided people may hold the crucial role in the vote tomorrow.

Undecided businesswoman Michelle Dewberry said that she has no problem with immigration but “public services are drowning”.

A Great Ormond Street Hospital doctor, Professor David Goldblatt, said that it is vital for his research on vulnerable children that we remain in the EU.

He said: “For every £1 we put in for research, we get £1.40 back for our children’s research.”

A Leave voter in the debate added: “We are all so frightened about leaving but we can still attract people to this country for the work we need.”

MP Anne Soubry said that we must remember that the EU is about peace and prosperity and the NHS would be “scuppered” without the immigrants working in them.

Former Home Secretary backed her up saying the European Union has been important for workers’ rights. 

The TUC General Secretary Frances O'Grady said that bad economical growth was a bigger threat than immigration. 

While the founder of Wetherspoons Tim Martin said getting out of the EU would stop the tariffs of wine coming to the country, Lord Lawson said we do not need trade agreements to trade. 

Lord Lawson said: “We care about our children, we care about our grandchildren. I believe firmly that this country will be far better off without the EU.”

Labour MP Chukka Umunna added: “I am not saying if we left the EU there would be armageddon.”

The 83-year-old actress Sheila Hancock said she rejoiced in being part of the European Union.

She said: “Surely we can solve these problems better if we are united to if we shut our eyes. I am proud to be British but also European” before saying she would be heartbroken if she was no longer European.” 

The debate came as the polls show the Leave side with a seven point lead over Remain.

