President Obama says US and UK will STILL have 'special relationship' in spite of Brexit

2016-06-24

GETTY 

Mr Obama has insisted the UK and Washington will “indispensable partners" following Britain’s decision to sever ties with Brussels.

It comes after a bout of scaremongering by the US president when he warned Britain would be “at the back of the queue” for a trade deal in the event of a British exodus from the 28-nation bloc. 

But the US leader appeared to go back on his word today when he said both the UK and European Union would remain "indispensable partners".

He said: "The people of the United Kingdom have spoken, and we respect their decision. The special relationship between the United States and the United Kingdom is enduring, and the United Kingdom's membership in Nato remains a vital cornerstone of US foreign, security and economic policy.

GETTY 

 The people of the United Kingdom have spoken, and we respect their decision

President Barack Obama

"So too is our relationship with the European Union, which has done so much to promote stability, stimulate economic growth, and foster the spread of democratic values and ideals across the continent and beyond.

"The United Kingdom and the European Union will remain indispensable partners of the United States even as they begin negotiating their ongoing relationship to ensure continued stability, security and prosperity for Europe, Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the world."

Prospective democratic candidate Hillary Clinton released a statement on Brexit.

She said: "We respect the choice the people of the United Kingdom have made.“Our first task has to be to make sure that the economic uncertainty created by these events does not hurt working families here in America.“We also have to make clear America’s steadfast commitment to the special relationship with Britain and the transatlantic alliance with Europe.“This time of uncertainty only underscores the need for calm, steady, experienced leadership in the White House to protect Americans’ pocketbooks and livelihoods, to support our friends and allies, to stand up to our adversaries, and to defend our interests.“It also underscores the need for us to pull together to solve our challenges as a country, not tear each other down.”

Donald Trump, who earlier congratulated Britain for taking back its country following Brexit, was quick to remind Mr Obama of his initial warning. 

He said: "It's something he shouldn't have done. It's not his country. It's not his part of the world. He shouldn't have done it.

"And I actually think that his recommendation perhaps caused it to fail." 

Mr Obama came under fire from a string of senior US politicians after meddling in Britain’s referendum on EU membership.

GETTY 

Brexit: What to expect next

He added later in the day: "David has been an outstanding friend and partner on the global stage and, based on our conversation, I'm confident that the UK is committed to an orderly transition out of the EU.

"We agreed that our economic and financial teams will remain in close contact as we stay focused on ensuring economic growth and financial stability.

"I then spoke to chancellor Merkel of Germany and we agreed that the United States and our European allies will work closely together in the weeks and months ahead.

"I do think yesterday's vote speaks to the ongoing changes and challenges that are raised by globalisation."

GETTY 

As many as 11 congressmen attacked the President’s decision to “pressure” the UK into backing the Remain campaign – calling the decision “misguided”.

Mr Obama urged Britain to stay in the 28-nation bloc alongside David Cameron on a trip to London in April.

Earlier today an emotional Mr Cameron announced his decision to stand down from his role as prime minister following the British exodus from Brussels.  

The Leave camp officially passed the winning mark just after six o'clock this morning as voters demanded Britain leave Europe. 

At 7.25am the official result declared Britain had voted for Brexit by 51.9 per cent to 48.1 per cent.

Overall, with all votes now counted, 17,410,742 Britons voted to quit the EU with 16,141,241 voting to Remain. 

