'When's he going to stop fibbing?' Brexit campaigner calls out PM over 'bullying' campaign

2016-06-22

Real estate entrepreneur and CEO Richard Tice called out David Cameron for having a history of reneging on his political promises.

Mr Tice's comments came shortly after Steve Hilton, former strategy director for Mr Cameron, claimed his old boss was told EU free movement rules meant he could not hit his net migration target.

The Leave.EU co-founder said this reflected poorly on the PM, insisting he must have known his immigration targets were unachievable.

He told talkRADIO: "Anybody who has any knowledge of this debate has known for years that being in the European Union means free movement of people, and the prime minister must have known."

"If he didn't, then frankly he's just not being very bright. It would be impossible to meet his claim.

"He's got a track record of saying one thing, in the full knowledge that he can't or won't deliver. When's he going to stop fibbing to the British people?"

GETTY

 When's he going to stop fibbing to the British people?

Richard Tice

Fretting that the prime minister's stance on Turkey joining the EU appeared unclear, he added: "The prime minister was asked three times on Sunday night, would he exercise a veto, and three times he didn't confirm it."

Experts have warned of economic problems if the country were to leave the EU, which Mr Tice categorically disagrees with.

He said: "If it's that cataclysmic, the prime minister should not have called it in the first place. A lot of those experts said that we should join the euro and thank God for Gordon Brown, we didn’t. The experts often get it wrong."

Predicting a victory for Leave, Tim continued: "People know that they are being fibbed to and bullied and threatened, with all these scare stories from the Treasury and the IMF and the CBI. All these people who failed in their predictions before.

"People have got to go with their gut and I think people that people will say 'I think we are big enough to be a self-governing nation in control of our laws and borders and we should vote to leave'."

The UK votes on whether to leave the European Union on June 23.

