Gibraltar under attack - Arrest as activists say 'we won't stop until Rock is reclaimed'

2016-06-21

GETTY

Under the slogan "Gibraltar Español!", activists laid out the huge 18 by 11 metre red and yellow banner on Monday afternoon while a statement released later claimed the "theft" of the Rock by the UK had turned it into a tax haven which had damaged the local economy.

The incendiary action reignited a debate over the sovereignty of Gibraltar, which has remained under British rule for more than 300 years.

Campaigners claimed Gibraltar had been returned to Spanish control for "20 minutes" yesterday while the flag was displayed on the side of the Upper Rock.

It was quickly removed and police later arrested Nacho Mínguez, president of the Madrid chapter of Vox, an insurgent right-wing party in Spain founded in 2013.

Santiago Abascal, the leader of Vox, said in a statement afterwards: "With this act, Vox wanted to state that we will never stop until full Spanish sovereignty of the Rock is reclaimed, the theft of which made it an unacceptable tax haven, damage to our fishermen, economic depression for the Campo de Gibraltar [the area of Spain neighbouring Gibraltar] as well as making local workers into hostages of that pirate [Fabian] Picardo [Gibraltar's chief minister]."

The party has demanded the release of Minguez, saying his arrest was "intolerable" because "unfurling a Spanish flag is not a crime on Spanish soil, as is Gibraltar, nor on European soil".

Mireia Lalaguna Rozo of Spain is crowned by former Miss World Jolene Strauss after winning the new title at the Miss World Grand Final in Sanya, China

Vox later claimed the man responsible for unfurling the flag had escaped from Gibraltar by swimming back to Spain.

Javier Ortega, a member of Vox who is believed to have been involved in the stunt, added: "With our national flag deployed, we are raising the symbol that represents our commitment to defend its unity and freedom wherever it is threatened.

"Our oath obliges us, our will impels us and your support encourages us.

"Today, as yesterday and tomorrow, Spanish Gibraltar! Long live Spain!"

PH

Genevieve Vinet•Facebook

The incident follows a declaration by the Spanish government last week that Gibraltar "remains Spanish, whether Brexit wins or loses".

Responding to a visit by David Cameron to the Rock, Spanish prime minister Mariano Rajoy said: "The government does not like Mr Cameron travelling to Gibraltar.

"What is being debated is that the United Kingdom remain in the EU or leave the EU and the campaign for that should happen in the United Kingdom and not in Gibraltar."

