Brexit debate has rekindled the spirit of parliamentary independence, says Sheila Lawlor

2016-06-20

GETTY

They may blame the hollowing out of Britain's unique political tradition on the professional cadres of slick ‘insiders’ who work their way through the system to an MP-ship, a government job and the ministerial payroll, landing the job of celebrity salesman (or woman) for the government of the day. 

Such a state of affairs is light years from the politics and causes which have marked Britain out as distinct through the ages. 

So far have things gone that many believe that parliament's role as the focus and repository of Britain’s freedoms, has been emasculated by the manner in which recent governments use power and patronage to dupe the people and over ride the will of parliament.

 The Brexit debate has rekindled the spirit of parliamentary independence

That fear is, as the EU referendum campaign shows, premature. 

We have seen many of Britain’s MPs defy their party leaders and the executive of the day to make common cause with the desire of British people to retain their historic freedoms via the British parliament, to elect their representatives to make the law on their behalf, and remove them from office if they are lacking. 

GETTY

As much of that law is now made by foreign authorities, unelected, unaccountable and for the most part unknown, it goes against the British political character and identity which goes back one thousand years or more. 

The Brexit debate has rekindled the spirit of parliamentary independence and responsibility. 

It has struck a blow against overweening government power. In standing up, once again to executive power, MPs have rekindled the role of parliament as the focus for Britain’s liberties and people’s freedom. 

Just as in the past, there are once again politicians who are willing to defy their leaders and the executive of the day, to risk their careers for an ideal in which they and the people they represent believe. 

That common interest in freedom shared between people and their parliament, has not been extinguished. 

After the referendum the focus will be on  parliament, on  how well MPs protect parliamentary freedom on behalf of the people who send them there. 

• Sheila Lawlor is the director of the think tank Politeia which this week publishes her Ruling the Ruler: Parliament, The People and Britain's political identity

For more information visit: politeia.co.uk

