Vote Leave boss predicts £200m Scots Brexit bonus

2016-06-24

NC

The former Labour MP said that despite a majority voting to stick with the EU, more than one million Scottish Leave votes had "tipped the balance" and allowed Britain to regain its sovereignty. 

Mr Harris also called for First Minister Nicola Sturgeon and the SNP to stop "wasting time" pursuing a second independence referendum and get down to work in planning for the "brilliant new reality". 

He said control over fishing and farming will automatically be devolved to the Scottish Parliament, while there could be a £200million a year "Brexit bonus" for Scotland's universities. 

Mr Harris said: "There are some really exciting opportunities here and Nicola Sturgeon is playing a dangerous game of brinkmanship. 

"She has 100,000 angry members who are desperate for another referendum and she has got to play along but I don't think it will happen for all sorts of reasons.

"For starters, she needs permission from the UK Government and she won't get that this time. 

"The Scottish Parliament is going to get powers over fishing, the environment and agriculture. SNP ministers now have the chance to do something with fishing which is great for the Scottish Parliament and great for fishing communities. 

"I've never voted SNP in my life but I'd much rather have SNP ministers running our fisheries than Brussels bureaucrats. 

"Here is an opportunity for Ms Sturgeon and her ministers to get involved in the negotiations right from the off. There are new powers coming and new, exciting things that can transform our country. 

"For example, they could explore a Scottish work visa to encourage skilled workers into the country instead of a policy of come one, come all from the EU." 

Brexit: What to expect next

 The Scottish Parliament is going to get powers over fishing

Mr Harris

He added: "She should be sitting down with ministers and civil servants right now and saying what do we want out of these negotiations? They should be fighting Scotland's corner instead of wasting time looking at another independence referendum. 

"This is a whole new world now and we need to take full advantage of it. I think it's exciting, a great opportunity for Scotland. Of course, there are risks and that is why we need to get every politician in the Scottish Parliament working on this.

"It wouldn't take long for talented politicians in all parties to get a handle on it. Once they sit down and think about the new reality they will realise it's going to be brilliant." 

Mr Harris suggested that Scotland could pursue its own trade deals for products such as whisky or salmon, while Scottish laws and legislation will no longer be open to challenge at the European Court of Justice. 

This would include, for example, the SNP's minimum price for alcohol and the ban on prisoners voting. 

Another big benefit could be the end of free university tuition for students from other EU Member States, as European law states they must be offered the same deal as Scottish residents. 

GETTY

REX/ SHUTTERSTOCK

Mr Harris said: "It costs us £80million a year and once we come out the Government will have the option of charging them in the same way as every other overseas student.

"Why would a student from Poland get different treatment to a student from China? These charges would bring in another £120million so that is £200million a year extra for our universities. The question then is how do we use that bonus? I would lobby for bursaries 

for poorer students from poorer areas to get into university." 

The former Glasgow South MP, who became the Scottish director of the Vote Leave campaign in March, also dismissed the suggestion that Scotland was now completely at odds with England and Wales. 

He said: "It was 62 to 38 in Scotland. There were bigger gaps in parts of England, especially in London.

"There were 1.6 million voted to Remain but their votes do not cancel out the two million who voted to stay in the UK. We all had a vote.

"There are so many benefits to leaving the EU and those people who voted Remain will come to recognise that and so will Nicola Sturgeon." 

