Scandalous treatment of Sir Cliff Richard raises questions

2016-06-17

GETTY

It took officers until May this year to hand over evidence to prosecutors and it was only yesterday that the singer was finally told he would face no charges. 

The handling of this case by police and prosecutors is an utter disgrace. Sir Cliff has done nothing wrong. 

In fact, he even went out of his way to be helpful. And it is worth remembering that he was never even placed under arrest. 

Yet still he was forced to endure almost two years living under the threat of prosecution, an experience sure to take a terrible emotional and financial toll.

And that is not to mention the irreparable damage that has been done to the reputation of a popular and successful entertainer. 

Throughout the farcical investigation the police managed to whip up a media frenzy. 

Sir Cliff believes that officers thought this would help them find other supposed victims. 

If so, this is an appalling abuse of their power. This case is far from unique. 

Sir Cliff is but one of the innocent men who has suffered during a witch-hunt against public figures accused of historic sex crimes. And nor is it only the famous who have been targeted.

In a bid to ensure more prosecutions for rape a number of men have been arrested, charged and even put on trial as a result of scandalously flimsy evidence. 

In light of these repeated failings the Government must consider granting anonymity to those accused of sexual offences.

------------------------

GETTY

HOPES of Britain quitting the EU next week have been given yet another boost as a new poll reveals a six-point lead for the Leave campaign. 

This will surely put a spring in the step of all those fighting for our nation’s freedom. 

GETTY

The Leave campaign is enjoying great momentum as a result of its ability to make a positive case for Brexit that is based on the facts. 

Remain still has no answer to the powerful Eurosceptic arguments. However, even at this late stage, there is still a large number of people yet to make up their minds. 

If we can spread the message and reach those wavering voters, victory looks more likely by the day.

------------------------



DURING the England and Wales football match yesterday players and supporters inside the stadium demonstrated a fierce but ultimately friendly rivalry.

This is exactly as sport should be. 

Those fans who have been causing trouble in France would do well to take note.

