Priest says there is a 'racist element' to border controls – but he IS backing Brexit

2016-06-21

The controversial remarks came during a bizarre exchange on BBC's Daily Politics which discussed the looming EU referendum vote.

Many of those who support the Leave campaign cite controlled immigration as a key reason behind their vote, according to a recent Ipsos Mori survey. 

However, Anglican priest and Guardian columnist Giles Fraser, who describes himself as a "bit of an extremist" on the issue, said he was voting to Leave – but just so Britain would have more open borders.

He said: "I think we should be in control of our borders – but just so they will be open."

BBC

When asked whether Britain should have any upper limit on immigration, he said: "I'm not convinced.

"It’s only been 100 years since we’ve really introduced immigration controls. 

"We only started having immigration controls because people were scared about the amount of Jews coming in.

"There was a racist element to border controls then as there is now as well."

BBC

 There is a racist element to border controls

Giles Fraser

He continued: "The fear is that the 'other' will come here and swamp us.

"I believe we should be way more generous than we are now, especially to those outside the EU.

"I realise I may be a bit of an extremist of this."

Fraser's comments came as a shock to Tim Montgomerie, a journalist for The Times and a fellow Brexit supporter.

Montgomerie said: "I think he may be living in fantasy land with his position."

He went on to dismiss arguments that those not in support of mass immigration from the EU are "racist".

He continued: "If you look at the opinion polls, every single ethnic community is opposed to large-scale immigration.

"It’s not the colour of the skin or religion, it’s the scale."

BBC

Social media users reacted with anger at Fraser's suggestion there was an element of racism to wanting to control the nation's borders.

One tweeted: "We aren't having open borders so virtue-signalling idiots can feel good about themselves!"

Another said: "Is Giles Fraser saying that borders between countries are basically racist?"

One user, named Steven McVey, added: "This vicar just called me a racist because I want our borders controlled. Ask him if he'd take a Syrian family into his house."

Fraser is supporting Brexit, and recently wrote in the Guardian: "From where I sit – and from where many of the left used to sit, including Jeremy Corbyn – the EU is not a natural love match for the left. 

"But while both sides are playing away, lefty Brexiters are accused of an especially egregious form of infidelity because of the racist memes that have been invoked by the out campaign. 

"As someone who believes in open borders, I regard Vote Leave’s cheap scaremongering over immigration as particularly irresponsible and downright nasty, and that Labour is wrong to follow its lead. But even so, I am still going to vote leave. 

"Indeed, I’d vote the same way as the devil himself if that were the way my conscience dictated. It’s not who you vote with – it’s what you vote for."

