‘EU is falling apart because it has NO shared values’ Ex-Polish leader in scathing attack

2016-06-18

GETTY

With Britain on the verge of voting to Leave, Lech Walesa said the bloc was in urgent need of reform.

Polls have revealed a 10-point swing towards Brexit with just a week to go until the historic EU referendum. 

And on the eve of that vote, Mr Walesa delivered a scathing criticism of the 28-country bloc saying Europe is in crisis because there are no shared values. 

 Europe, this European construction, has no foundation. We rejected Christianity, we rejected ideologies like communism and now, there’s nothing left

Lech Walesa

He said: “Europe, this European construction, has no foundation. We rejected Christianity, we rejected ideologies like communism and now, there’s nothing left. What can we expect from societies when each of them has different foundations?” 

Veteran Polish statesman Mr Walesa said he believes the EU must be reformed or a new organisation created. 

He said: “I’m rather more in favour of repairing what we already have. What's the use of starting all over again?

"But we need to do it, repair the EU, in a more efficient and transparent way. 

“We have to explain things better to people; they need to understand what we're doing and why it exists.

“What we've got now is mistrust, suspicions, bureaucracy, dissatisfaction and trickery, because we don't have any solid foundations.”

AFP

GETTY

Mr Walesa, warned Germany, France and Italy "should have a contingency scenario prepared to put in place 15 minutes after the EU falls apart”.

The Nobel Peace Prize winner said he believes Germany should lead a reformed EU if Britain votes to leave or consider creating a new organisation.

The 72-year-old said: “Germany in particular must calculate what would be better for development of the EU: do we create a completely new organisation or do we fix the old EU? 

“It’s up to the Germans to decide because they are the leaders and they must also decided with whom they want to build. 

GETTY

“After the current EU falls apart, a new union must be created, but it must be thought out much better in order to avoid the kind of problems we have now. 

“Whoever wants to join it, can join, whole those who don’t, can just say ‘no thanks’.” 

His comments come as leading politicians from member states have said Brexit could be a great opportunity. 

12 reasons why you should vote IN or OUT of EU

Discussions are said to be taking place on reshaping the EU if Britain leaves. 

Former Belgian Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt said: "Why should we be afraid of a Brexit?

“If it happens we could use this occasion to reshape Europe." 

France is also said to be poised for a referendum in the hope it can take on a more central role in the bloc.

