Police called as woman hands PEN to EU referendum voters as rigging fears sparks #Usepens

2016-06-23

Thousands are using the Twitter hashtag #Usepens to urge voters not to use the pencils provided in polling booths up and down Britain.

There are fears votes could be rubbed out and replaced.

The Electoral Commission has confirmed both pens and pencil markings are accepted, and it was down to individual choice.

But in one polling station in Chichester police stopped a member of the public from lending pens to all voters, claiming a Remain campaigner called the officers.

She wrote: “Police came to Chichester polling station called by REMAIN side to stop me lending my PEN to all voters. #fraud.”

She later said it was someone at the Chichester polling station.

GETTY

CATERS

The Electoral Commission has defended the use of pencils amid the widespread suspicions over the writing tool in the referendum. 

A spokesperson said: “By tradition, pencils are available in polling booths for voters to mark their ballot papers.

CATERS

"If a voter wishes to bring their own pen and use that, it's fine.

“In regards to security, at the count there are statutory observers to make sure that they are carried out correctly. Campaigners are also invited to observe the counts taking place.” 

Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), makes a statement after Britain voted to leave on the European Union

Making light of the situation, esteemed professor Brian Cox tweeted: “I voted in pencil just in case MI5 need to change it later.”

A recent YouGov poll revealed 46 per cent of Brexiteers fear the poll will be rigged, which is reflected in the volume of tweets from the Leave camp instructing voters to use indelible ink. 

Worried the Govt. will change your Leave vote? Why not #usepens to cross out the Remain option? #commonsense

Must be an expert who can calculate how many MI5 agents it takes to rub out all the little Leave pencil crosses in less than 24hrs. #usepens

Polling stations opened their doors up and down the country today as people decide whether to remain or leave the EU. 

Some operations have bit hard by the torrential flooding sweeping the southeast, with some stations forced to move into dryer buildings. 

Jean-Claude Juncker: "The people who cast the votes decide nothing. The people who count the votes decide everything" #usepens

Why bother rubbing your cross out when it's obvious that it's been rubbed out? #usepens is the most Brexit of hashtags.

Travel chaos, caused by the weather, also raised concerns people have may been hampered getting to their local booth, which will begin to close around 10pm this evening.

All the main leaders have been photographed casting their ballot at their respective station as the eagerly anticipated result is due tomorrow. 

