Rush to buy euros: Britons queue around the block for currency just HOURS after EU vote

2016-06-24

FAMEFLYNET.UK.COM

The rush has seen NatWest, RBS and Thomas Cook refuse temporarily suspend handing out euros.

Queues have been reported at currency exchanges across the country as the pound fell by up to 11 per cent overnight to reach its lowest level since 1985. 

People were seen snaking out of the door of one exchange in Leeds and there were reports of queues around the block at the currency exchange in Bishopsgate, central London. 

Long lines were photographed at Thomas Exchange in Canary Wharf as the shockwaves of Brexit were felt around the world. 

 Sterling continues to suffer with GBP/USD dealing 10 per cent lower from its high only a few hours ago!

Chris Towner

Markets were sent crashing within minutes of opening this morning as the FTSE 100 lost £140billion. 

Sterling plunged 11 per cent overnight against the dollar to hit lows of 1.34, after Britain voted to cut ties with Brussels.

At the same time, the pound fell to 1.2 against the euro. The current exchange rate is €1.24 to the pound - at the start of 2016 it was €1.36. 

If you changed £1,000 to euros today - just hours after the referendum - you would get £120 less than if you had changed the same amount in January. 

Chris Towner, chief economist at HiFX said: "Sterling continues to suffer with GBP/USD dealing 10 per cent lower from its high only a few hours ago!"

Bank of England Governor Mark Carney moved to calm markets this morning and said the institution was ready to inject up to £250billion to keep markets functioning.

FAMEFLYNET.UK.COM

FAMEFLYNET.UK.COM

Queue outside currency converter office #brexit pic.twitter.com/b1RvdUjbSy

High street banks made the decision to suspend transactions following the surge.

NatWest, Thomas Cook and RBS customers were reportedly told foreign notes were not being given out due to "unprecedented demand".

The world reacts to Britain's EU Referendum result

The panic comes hours after Britain voted to leave the EU. 

Leave officially passed the winning mark just after six o'clock this morning as voters demanded the UK untangle itself from the 28-country bloc.

Overall, with all votes counted, 17.4million Britons voted to quit the EU with 16,1million voting to Remain. 

Chancellor George Osborne briefed G7 financial ministers and bank chiefs this morning as the Bank of England unveiled its contingency plan.

