EU faces 'immense DANGER' Hollande warns after THREE-HOUR emergency crisis talks in France

2016-06-24

GETTY 

Ministers in the French Government met before 8am (UK time) at an emergency meeting chaired by Hollande to discuss its reponse to the UK's decison to untangle itself from the 28-nation bloc. 

Speaking after a three-hour crisis meeting with top ministers he had summoned to the Elysée Palace, Hollande said the UK vote left Europe facing “an immense danger.”

The French leader said the UK's vote to leave must "jolt" the EU in to action. 

He said: "The British people have decided to leave. It is a sad decision but one which I respect.

"The vote puts the European Union in difficulties. It must recognise its shortfalls.

GETTY 

Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), makes a statement after Britain voted to leave on the European Union

 The British people have decided to leave. It is a sad decision but one which I respect

Francois Hollande

"A jolt is necessary. Europe must reaffirm it values of freedom, solidarity, peace. The EU must be understood and controlled by its citizens.

"I will do everything to secure profound change rather than decline."

He said France would push for initiatives on Europe’s defense and security “to protect its borders and deal with its enemies,” as well as on tax and social harmonization, and strengthening the eurozone notably by improving its “democratic governance.”The Leave camp officially passed the winning mark just after six o'clock this morning as voters demanded Britain leave Europe. 

Hollande admitted that there was a need to  “understand [Europe’s] shortcomings” after British voters opted on June 23 to leave the EU.

Far-right National Front leader Marine Le Pen has already called for an EU referendum after she threw her weight behind the Brexit camp. 

This morning she repeated her previous calls for a “Frexit” following the historic vote – which saw the Leave campaign win more than 52 per cent of the votes.  

She tweeted: “Victory to liberty! As I have been demanding for many years, we now need the same referendum in France and EU countries.”

Hollande had previously made it clear that a leave vote was "irreversible", and that there will now be "extremely serious consequences" for the UK.

Britain's decision for an exodus has sent shockwaves around the world, with the UK's allies and rivals scrambling to assess the implications of the vote.

REUTERS 

The presidents of the European Commission, Council and Parliament will also hold a joint press conference in Brussels to set out their initial response to the demand for Brexit. 

Ministers in the Irish Government were called to special talks to reflect on the result ahead of a statement by Taoiseach Enda Kenny.

German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier tweeted: "The early morning news from #GreatBritain are truly sobering. It looks like a sad day for #Europe, the #UnitedKingdom. #UK"

 

PA 

Hollande will meet German Chancellor Angela Merkel in Berlin on Monday for urgent talks ahead of a scheduled European Council summit in Brussels where leaders will discuss the fallout.

It comes as European Council president Donald Tusk said Britain's "historic" vote should not provoke "hysterical reactions", adding that the EU is prepared for Brexit.

He offered EU leaders an informal meeting at next Tuesday's European summit in Brussels to discuss "the details of further proceedings".

Mr Tusk added: "We are determined to keep our unity as 27."

