Pound and FTSE 100 sees biggest one-day rise in years ahead of EU vote

2016-06-20

GETTY

London's top stock market, which holds billions of pounds worth of pension savings, the pound and gold prices are among the investments set to be caught up in the mayhem.

The FTSE 100 has today leapt by more than three per cent, after last week plunging to a four-month low.

Wild gyrations are expected to continue until the June 23 vote, as traders are swept up in momentum that can switch direction with no notice. At the same time, the pound has today seen its biggest one-day jump since 2009, with sharp movements against key currencies, including the dollar and the euro, set to contine over the coming days.

The London Stock Exchange

Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets UK, said: "We’re still getting some rather ludicrous predictions of what the pound might do in the event of a “leave” vote, which to some extent has caused some rather extreme positioning, and will likely contribute to a lot more choppiness in the coming days."

Brexit volatility is also set to hit markets outside of the UK - especially in Europe, where investors are worried about whether the bloc can survive if Britain votes to leave. Rapid changes in the price of gold, and other safe haven investments, are expected to contine amid changes in trader confidence.



Laith Khalaf, senior analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said: "Waves from the Brexit vote are buffeting the UK stock market, tossing it up and down as the opinion polls shift this way and that. "Until the vote is over we can expect more price swings, as markets struggle to price in a unique event that carries with it such a high degree of uncertainty. "If you want to get an idea of what stocks will do well in the event of a vote to stay in the UK, it’s worth taking a look at today’s FTSE leader board. "The market has clearly identified financials and house builders as beneficiaries of a vote to remain in the UK, with a Sterling rally also indicating how the currency might move if we vote to remain in Europe." 

