EU referendum 2016: What CAN you do at the polling station today?

2016-06-23

Reuters

Dog owners will be glad to know that you can bring your pets to the polling station as long as they do not disrupt the vote. 

Parents can bring their children along to watch democracy in action, but kids cannot mark the ballot paper for their mother or father. 

Horse riders in rural parts of Britain should tether their horses and ponies up outside the polling station before voting. 

PICTURES: DOGS AT POLLING STATIONS

PA

Voting during the school run? Children are welcome at #EURef polling stations. Polling stations are open 7am-10pm. #TurnUp

The law does not specifically ban taking photos, but the Electoral Commission very strongly advises against any photography inside a polling station.

Photos could ruin the secrecy of the ballot and it is illegal to reveal how someone else has voted - something that could happen in a careless selfie. 

"The Electoral Commission advises voters not to take photos inside the polling station as they could potentially breach the secrecy of the ballot requirements," the Commission said.

"Anyone who wants to take a selfie can do this outside the polling station." 



There is no requirement for voters to show their face so you can wear a hoodie even if it covers your face. 

But be aware that polling station staff need to make sure that voters are not impersonating someone else. 

Birmingham City Council's head of electoral services Rob Connelly said: "If you can't see someone's face we can ask them the statutory questions - things like their name and address. 

“We wouldn't stop someone voting if they're wearing a hoodie or a burka.” 



12 reasons why you should vote IN or OUT of EU

The Commission warns against tweeting about your vote from inside the polling station itself.

But once you are outside the polling station you are free to take to Twitter to let the world know how you voted. 

EU REFERENDUM: HOW TO VOTE



@stegregory35 yes, you can bring your own pen/marker/sharpie

Getty

Voters can bring their own pens and pencils to fill in their ballot paper. According to tradition, pencils are available in polling booths.   

The most important thing to do is clearly put a cross in the box so it is obvious which way you are voting. 

WHEN DO RESULTS COME IN?



