I fear for other countries in Europe betrayed by Brussels, says CHRIS ROYCROFT-DAVIS

2016-06-24

GETTY

This time the home side is victorious. History will mark June 23, 2016, as the glorious day of the People’s Revolt. The day when 17,410,472 ordinary men and women did something extraordinary and stood up to be counted. 

By voting for freedom they struck an almighty blow for democracy that sent out a stirring message of defiance which will echo through the wide-eyed capitals of the other 27 European Union countries.  

I’m proud of every single Leave voter. If there were a way to shake all 17 million by the hand I would do so because by taking back their country in such dramatic fashion voters have shown the arrogant politicians, bureaucrats and bankers that we can’t be bullied or scared into cowering submission. 

The will of the people reigns supreme once again and I deem it an honour to have played a role in the momentous campaign to throw off the EU millstone which has been dragging us down for decades and which threatened to finish us off as an independent nation.

Since November 2010, when the Daily Express – unique among the media – launched its crusade to get Britain out of the EU, the newspaper has been pilloried by the elite, mocked by the Establishment, branded as Little Englanders, vilified as racists. It didn’t care then and it cares even less today. Newspapers have broad shoulders and the sword and shield of the Crusader still gleam atop our Page One masthead. 

But what has offended me deeply is the way readers have been subjected to appalling abuse because they had the temerity to speak out and fight for what they believed in. So I salute you for your determination just as I applaud the remarkable tenacity of Nigel Farage, who has achieved his life’s ambition. 

Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), makes a statement after Britain voted to leave on the European Union

All those have displayed disdain for democracy have been taught a lesson. The bullies have been given a taste of the one medicine they can’t stomach – people power. After 25 years of banging my head against the Brussels brick wall, writing the words “people power” fills my heart with joy. 

Amid the jubilation at giving the arrogant EU a richly-deserved bloody nose however we must show respect to those who unsuccessfully voted to Remain. We are the United Kingdom after all and it has never been more true that we are all in this together. 

The ups and downs of the currency and share markets affect every one of the 33 million who took part in the biggest democratic exercise this country has ever seen. We should hold in our hearts the words of Winston Churchill: “In War. Resolution. In Defeat. Defiance. In Victory. Magnanimity.” 

Those who bleat that the referendum campaign has been corrosive and divisive should remember who called it – David Cameron who went on to lead the Remain campaign. Many Tory voters will find it hard to believe that just 15 months ago they were celebrating his unexpected victory in a general election. How are the mighty fallen. 

The manner of his going, with dignity and an explicit recognition that the needs of the country must be placed above personal considerations, says much about the qualities which made him a good Prime Minister (not an outstanding one in my view) but one who had to go because he so badly misjudged the mood of the voters with the tone of his Project Fear campaign.

On his political CV it will say he picked a fight for the wrong reason – and then lost it. But how much better that is than the alternative – being known as the man who led this country into the oblivion of being a toothless tiger in the zoo of a United States of Europe. The anger in Brussels over what one French MEP called Cameron’s “irresponsible” behaviour in calling the referendum shows how rattled our continental neighbours are at the prospect that the EU’s shaky house of cards could soon come toppling down.

GETTY

GETTY

The people of France, Italy, Holland and Denmark will be reflecting this weekend on whether they have the courage to tell their political masters that like Britain they want to take back control of their countries. That is an irresistible force which is about to smash into the immoveable object the EU rashly considers itself to be. 

Soon in Britain we will have a new Prime Minister, a new Cabinet and most probably a new Chancellor and a new leader of the Labour party. Boris Johnson and Michael Gove came to praise Cameron, not to bury him. In their measured tributes they struck exactly the right tone and sought unity not recrimination. 

Not so the small-minded reaction north of the border where Nicola Sturgeon raised two fingers to the verdict of the United Kingdom and 38 per cent of her own voters who voted to leave the EU – which she said was “democratically unacceptable” because the vote didn’t go the way she wanted – and warned she would be making plans for a second independence referendum and would be cosying up to the EU to see if there’s a way Scotland can continue to sell its soul to Brussels.

GETTY

Frankly, that is the politics of the playground – “you’ve scored a goal against my team so I’m going to take my ball home.” But if Scotland wants to go it alone then so be it. Most of us strongly believe in the United Kingdom but we also believe in democracy and if Scotland wants to put its head in a noose then good luck to it. 

Some of us may miss you but it’s your choice. Just don’t come running back if it all goes wrong – you can’t have your cake and eat it, as they say in Dundee. The speed with which senior Labour figures tabled a motion of no confidence in the car crash that is Jeremy Corbyn reflects the bitterness felt by the party’s core working class vote at the total lack of leadership and principle he has shown on the EU issue. 

If, as seems distinctly possible, the new Tory leader (Boris? Gove? Priti Patel?) calls a snap general election in the autumn then Labour can’t be blamed for wanting someone at its head who has at least some chance of attracting voters back to the party.  So much has changed since Britain joined the Common Market in 1973.

Brexit: What to expect next

Then, with the unions destroying the country’s ability to generate wealth we were known as the Sick Man of Europe. Today we are the healthy man and it’s Europe that’s sick – while the referendum result has ushered in a new golden age of prosperity for us. I’m thrilled for my country. Yes, including Scotland.

But I fear for the betrayed people of Greece, Italy and Spain who’ve been badly screwed by Brussels. I fear that the Poles, such brave wartime allies, will feel they are no longer welcome here, which would be untrue. I fear the rise of the extreme right in France and Germany. The one thing I don’t have any fears about is the future of Britain. 

We’ve always been a great country but this vote has set us free to become world leaders once more. We just need the City sharks to stop their frenzied and unscrupulous gambling with the pound.

