BREXIT: Bitcoin price ROCKETS as markets ditch pound

2016-06-24

GETTY

The historic decision for the UK to leave the European Union has proved great news for one currency, as Bitcoin enjoys a huge surge in popularity.

The online currency, popular amongst gamers and online traders, hit a high of $680 (£493) this morning following the news of Britain's exit.

At the time of publication, one Bitcoin was worth $667 (£483), according to online valuer CoinDesk.

Brexit: What to expect next

This was in opposition to sterling, which fell 10 percent in value to its weakest point since 1985, triggering a global rush of capital into the traditional security of the yen and the Swiss franc.

According to Quartz, there is currently around $10.6 billion of Bitcoin currently in circulation, which is a tiny amount when compared to the amount of dollars, yen or pounds that pass through foreign exchange markets every day.

Alongside the biggest moves in the pound in living memory, the euro, which is expected to struggle given worries about the impact of a "Brexit" on the euro zone economy, also dropped sharply against the dollar.

Analysts expect months of economic and political turmoil which will dwarf the pressure on UK markets following sterling's "Black Wednesday" in 1992 when Britain was forced out of the pre-euro Exchange Rate Mechanism.

getty

The rise in Bitcoin comes months after a leading Bank of England economist proposed that Britain should abandon our traditional paper and metal currency for a government-backed digital alternative.

Andy Haldane said  that a switch to digital would help the bank to manage inflation by enabling it to bypass the current constraint against lowering rates below zero.

Such a move came one step closer back in September when Barclays announced it would be trialling the use of Bitcoin in its branches, the first such deal in British banking history.

Bitcoin has enjoyed a checkered existence since its emergence on the financial scene several years ago.

At one point the currency was worth more than $1,000 per unit, although this fell sharply after it became closely linked to online trading platform Silk Road, where people often dealt drugs, which was later shut down. 

