Ridiculous EU rules that Britain has to adhere to: Six of the worst

2016-06-24

Getty

Brussels bureaucrats plan to crack down on toasters, kettles and hair-dryers shortly after today's EU referendum on Britain’s membership of the bloc. 

The proposed ban on high-powered household appliances is part of the European Commission’s long delayed ‘eco-design restrictions’.

Even some EU officials have admitted that the move would bring “ridicule”. The new rules come after the controversial ban of high-powered vacuum cleaners.

In a widely ridiculed ruling, Brussels bosses banned rogue bananas with "malformations and abnormal curvature". 

In 2009, the European Union introduced strict restrictions on the quality of bananas and other fruit sold within the EU. 

Under the regulations, Class I bananas can have “slight defects of shape” but Class II bananas are allowed to have “defects of shape”. 



Under a bizarre EU law, it is illegal for people to eat pet horses but they are still allowed to eat other types of horses.

Europeans who raise and slaughter horses for meat must not pass them off as pets in a bid to dodge food safety rules. 

Horse passports must show whether horses can be used for food at the end of their life. 

Getty

Brexit campaigner and Tory MP Boris Johnson proclaimed that “ludicrous” EU rules mean that “children under eight cannot blow up balloons”.

But in a strongly-worded denial the European Commission had previously said: “EU DOES NOT ban children from blowing up balloons”. 

The controversial directive warns that children under eight should not blow up latex balloons without adult supervision. 



Getty

Eurosceptic actress Liz Hurley came out in support of Brexit as it means that Britain can go back to using decent “60-watt, peach-coloured” light bulbs. 

Widely unpopular EU regulations have restricted the sale of incandescent light bulbs because they were seen as not energy efficient enough. 

Their more energy efficient replacements - LED and fluorescent bulbs - give off a colder, more unnatural light. 

Pros and cons of Brexit

While pushing for a Brexit, MP Johnson said in his Telegraph column that barmy EU rules mean that “you can’t recycle a tea bag”.

Under EU law, local authorities are allowed to ban the composting of teabags if there are fears over the spread of disease. 

For example, Cardiff Council told household not to throw away tea bags in an attempt to prevent the spread of foot-and-mouth disease in 2005.

WHAT IS BREXIT?

