Bob Geldof’s two fingers to UK fishermen gesture HARMED Remain campaign say activists

2016-06-17

REUTERS 

Pro-EU Labour party activist Bethany Pickering said Geldof had “harmed” the Remain campaign after the multi-millionaire hijacked a Brexit promotional campaign down the Thames and taunted Leave campaigners. 

Ms Pickering said she was forced to walk off the Remain boat to distance herself from Geldof’s actions. 

She said: “We didn’t expect it would be a billionaire being condescending to fishermen. And we didn’t expect it to be as vicious as it was.” 

The Labour activist told LBC radio: “There was a lot of negativity and that’s something I’m really disappointed in as a Remain voter and someone who has campaigned for Remain. 



REUTERS 

 Geldof was using his ability and his money in order to drown out what they had to say.

Bethany Pickering, Labour Party activist

“I think potentially Bob Geldof did a lot of damage, especially among the fishing communities that weren’t sure how they were going to vote. 

“Again, it was a very patronising thing. It was very much mocking the issues that they had.

“It was at the point where we approached small fishing boats, that were obviously concerned working class people with legitimate reasons to be concerned - and then it was the jeering at them and trying to drown out their issues.” 

Ms Pickering joins a long line of critics, including Ukip leader Nigel Farage, who described the musician’s actions as “disgusting”. 

Mr Farage had led a fleet of Brexit-supporting fishermen through Tower Bridge, in a colourful stunt that drew crowds to the riverside. 

But things appeared to turn nasty when Geldof and an assortment of Remain activists in dinghies and hired craft criss-crossed in front of the flotilla. 

Geldof used a loud speaker to hurl abuse at Farage and taunt Brexit supporters.



GETTY 



FACEBOOK 

Ms Pickering said: “Geldof was using his ability and his money in order to drown out what they had to say. He personally swore at some of the fishing boats and made swearing gestures at them as well. 

“So did a lot of people on board.” 

Geldof has since defended his actions, comparing a vote to leave Brussels in next week’s historic EU referendum to Britain’s involvement in the Iraq war. 

He said: “I was invited to come with the ‘In Crowd’. Someone needs to make a visible effort to stop this nonsense. 

“It reminds me of pre-Iraq where there doesn’t see to be a plan and we woke up one morning and realised we were in a terrible disaster.” 

