Cameron urged to reveal full details of 'secretive Turkey EU negotiations'

2016-06-16

GETTY

Senior figures in the Vote Leave campaign for an EU exit wrote to the Prime Minister to call for a full statement on the secretive negotiations, which could lead to more than 70million Turkish citizens getting the right to live anywhere in the bloc including Britain.

The letter came after Downing Street caved in and abandoned an attempt to stop a new phase in talks between the EU and the Turkish government.

"With a week to go before the public cast their votes on 23rd June, it is essential that voters are fully informed about Turkish accession to the EU," the letter said.

 Voters should be informed about Turkish accession to the EU

Vote Leave letter

It was signed by senior Tories Michael Gove and Boris Johnson and former Labour minister Gisela Stuart.

The trio are all senior members of the Vote Leave campaign group.

During talks in Brussels earlier this week, British diplomats resisted an attempt by EU officials to open a new "negotiating chapter" in relations with the Turkish government.

The EU wanted the talks to progress as a gesture of goodwill to Turkey following a deal to try to tackle the migrant crisis in the Eastern Mediterranean.

GETTY

At a meeting in Brussels on Tuesday, Britain was the only country to refuse consent for the talks on financial and budgetary issues.

After a few hours, UK diplomats dropped their opposition. Talks are due to resume on June 24 or 30 as a result.

The Vote Leave letter said the Government needed to make its position on Turkey joining the EU following the diplomatic retreat.

"Despite the rapidly accelerating pace of accession negotiations, IN campaigners maintain that Turkey ‘is not an issue in this referendum and it shouldn't be.' 



GETTY

"Others assert that the UK has ‘a veto' on Turkish accession. 

"This claim is obviously artificial given the Government's commitment to Turkish accession at the earliest possible opportunity. 

"They also insist that this is the public's last opportunity to have a say on Europe in our lifetimes."

GETTY

The letter urged Mr Cameron to make clear if he would promise to veto the accession of Turkey to the EU and to try to stop Turkish citizens getting visa-free access to mainland Europe as part of the deal this summer.

"If the Government cannot give this guarantee, the public will draw the reasonable conclusion that the only way to avoid having common borders with Turkey is to Vote Leave and take back control on 23 June," the letter said.

