Nicola Sturgeon: Independent Scotland could use the euro after Brexit

2016-06-21

GETTY

The First Minister said the SNP would consider ditching the pound in the event of a Leave vote triggering the break-up of the United Kingdom. 

She insisted entering the troubled single currency was not party policy for a break away Scotland. 

But the pro-EU Nationalist leader claimed sterling may not be "as attractive a currency" if it weakens after Brexit. 

She said the SNP would enter "decisions and discussions" over the euro if Britain leaves the bloc against the majority of Scots' wishes. 

Anti-EU campaigners accused her of the threatening voters with the prospect of the eurozone to secure a Remain vote. 

Scottish Vote Leave director Tom Harris said she had "given up" on making a positive case for staying tied to Brussels. 

He added: "The euro was always a bad idea, not just for the UK but for Europe. It's resulted in record unemployment in the eurozone and sluggish growth. 

GETTY

"It is a basket-case currency and it is creating a basket-case economy. Does Nicola Sturgeon seriously think Scots want to swap the pound for the euro? 

"Has anyone even told Nicola that only 15 per cent of Scotland's exports go to the EU, with 64 per cent going to destinations in the rest of the UK? 

"How would adopting the euro help our economy? We would be better off swapping the pound for Mickey Mouse dollars." 

During the 2014 referendum campaign the SNP argued an independent Scotland would continue to share the pound =97 despite Treasury warnings it would not happen. 



 The euro was always a bad idea

Tom Harris

And earlier this month Ms Sturgeon insisted that a future separate Scotland would still use the pound. 

But the issue was thrown back into the spotlight on Monday when SNP MP Joanna Cherry told a television debate Scotland could adopt the euro if sterling "nosedives" after Brexit. 

Speaking in Edinburgh, Ms Sturgeon said a rerun of the September 2014 vote "is definitely on the table" if Scotland is forced out of the EU. 

Challenged about Ms Cherry's comments she said: We will have that discussion if that's the situation that we are in next week." 

GETTY

She said it was a "statement of fact" that the pound "might not be as attractive a currency" after Brexit. 

Ms Sturgeon added: "It is not the SNP's policy to seek entry to the euro now or at any time in the foreseeable future. 

"But these are decisions and discussions that, yes, we will have if we are in the scenario of a Brexit. 

GETTY

"But I hope we are not in that scenario because I hope people across the UK vote strongly to stay in." 

She also claimed EU women's rights, such maternity leave, face being "dismantled" by Boris Johnson and Nigel Farage if they take control at Westminster after Brexit. 

But Eurosceptic Tory MSP Ross Thomson branded her claims "extraordinary". 

