REVEALED: As Brussels chief rules out any reform, here are seven EU promises Cameron broke

2016-06-23

The all-powerful EU Commission President torpedoed the PM's main argument for staying in the sclerotic union - to reform it from the inside - leaving the Remain campaign holed below the waterline. 

But tonight details of seven other "no ifs, no buts" promises Mr Cameron has made over the years shows how the Brussels machine was never reformable in the first place, with Mr Juncker only confirming a long-standing truth. 

The dossier, released by the Leave.EU campaign, shows how the Prime Minister has miserably failed to secure any kind of changes to more than half a dozen key policy areas ranging from immigration to sovereignty to human rights. 

In a devastating video the eurosceptic group raise serious doubts over Mr Cameron's ability to follow through with even the meagre measures he secured from his humiliating 'reform' drive earlier this year. 

Leave.EU spokesman Jordan Ryan said: “Even Jean-Claude Juncker has admitted today that the EU can not and will not be reformed. The only way to secure any real change is to vote to Leave tomorrow.”

Earlier today Mr Juncker told a press conference: "British voters have to know there will be no kind of any negotiation. We have conceded a deal with the prime minister. He got the maximum we could give, so there will be no kind of renegotiation."

Here are the seven EU promises Mr Cameron reneged on ahead of the referendum vote. 

GETTY

 [Leave.EU]

1. Bring law making powers back to Britain

During his bid to become Tory leader Mr Cameron promised that should be become Prime Minister, he would “bring back powers over social policy and employment policy that are causing so much damage to British business”.

Since taking the keys to Number 10 he has gone curiously quiet on this matter, and it did not form any part of the “new deal” he claims we have secured with Brussels.

2. No more powers to Brussels without a referendum

In September 2010 the Prime Minister promised that “never again will powers be transferred to Brussels without a referendum" as the Coalition government passed amendments to the European Communities Act. 

Since then we have surrendered at least 35 significant powers to the EU, including the controversial European Arrest Warrant.

 [GETTY]

3. Reform the European Court of Human Rights

In a speech in January 2012 - the last time Britain chaired the Council of Europe - Mr Cameron said: “The focus of our chairmanship, as you know, is our joint effort to reform the European Court of Human Rights.”

This wasn’t part of his renegotiation and Brussels bureaucrats have repeatedly warned the court is sacrosanct. 

4. Treaty change before the referendum

In January last year, speaking before the Conservatives won a surprise majority in the May 2015 General Election, the PM spelled out how he would see out his promise of an EU referendum. 

He said: “The changes that we need are changes that are good for Britain and good for Europem they do involve treaty change and proper full on treaty change for that matter.”

The deal that Mr Cameron brought back does not change a single EU treaty, and is instead merely a written accorde which has no binding legal status. 

GETTY

 [GETTY]

5. End EU laws that are damaging to the NHS

Speaking about the controversial EU Working Time Directive, that many experts feel has a serious impact on care provision in this country, Mr Cameron pledged: "The health and business secretaries are committed to revising the directive at an EU level to give the NHS the flexibility it needs to deliver their best, safest service to patients". 

Just months later George Osborne revealed such reform would not be part of the PM's renegotiation deal, and nothing has been done on the subject since. 

6. Not paying the £1.7billion bill

The EU provoked fury in October 2014 when it presented Britain with a whopping £1.7billion surcharge. 

A furious Mr Cameron took to the airwaves and raged: “A bill for Britain of £1.7bn pounds, I’m not paying that bill on the first of December, if people think I am going to they have got another thing coming. It is not going to happen.”

A year later he and George Osborne secretly paid it in full.

7. Secure and sustainable immigration

Perhaps his most infamous pledge, the Prime Minister made bringing net migration down to the "tens of thousands" a key plank of his 2015 election manifesto. 

He assured the public: “With us, our borders will be under control and immigration will be at levels our countries can manage, no ifs, no buts.”

Since then, over 1.2million people have come to the UK, while net migration to is currently running at more than 330,000 people a year. 

In a damning interview earlier this week the PM's former adviser, Steve Hilton, revealed how civil servants had told him and Mr Cameron the pledge could never be fulfilled before it was included in the manifesto.

