NHS will suffer £600m BLACK HOLE as it struggles with migration if Remain wins, says Leave

2016-06-21

GETTY

Research by Vote Leave shows the creaking health service will need an extra £309million per year because of the influx if the UK fails to throw off Brussels rule.

The figure will be worse if the EU allows in Turkey, Macedonia, Montenegro, Albania and Serbia, when some £624million would be needed to maintain spending at current levels. 

Scottish Vote Leave director Tom Harris – the former Labour MP – warned this would mean recruiting an extra 834 extra doctors and 2,967 nurses to deal with the pressure.

His claims came as Nicola Sturgeon attacked Leave figures suggesting the NHS will get a £100million a week cash transfusion if voters back Brexit in Thursday’s referendum.

The First Minister, who is campaigning for Remain, said it was “deceitful and contemptible” to claim the cash can be saved by ending UK’s weekly contribution to Brussels coffers.

She also argued cutting ties with the bloc would put the NHS and workers’ rights at risk with “ profound consequences” for the health service. 

GETTY

However, Mr Harris accused her of “sticking her head in the sand” over the problems posed by uncontrolled immigration. 

He said: “Most functional modern democracies take for granted the right to control their borders.

"At a time of stretched budgets, families will be concerned about the increasing pressure the NHS will come under from uncontrolled EU migration. 

GETTY

“Outside the EU, Scotland can take back control. “We would take back control over the £1.55billion Scotland sends to Brussels every year, and we would take back control over our borders so we can plan NHS services.”

Forecasts suggest 269,000 people could come to Scotland from the EU between 2016 and 2030, a population three times that of the Stirling Council area. 

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

Of the 370,000 migrants who arrived by 2011, 134,910 were from bloc members. However, Professor Sir Harry Burns, former chief medical officer for Scotland and a member of the Scotland Stronger in Europe advisory group, said:

“Skilled men and women from other European countries make a vital contribution to Scotland’s NHS and our public services would suffer if the Leave campaign took us out of the EU.



“The bottom line is that Leave want to pull us out of the single market – which is vital for jobs and investment in Scotland – and that would make our economy smaller, with less money to invest in the NHS and other vital services.”

Earlier, Ms Sturgeon told the Royal College of Nursing congress in Glasgow that a Leave vote could have “profound consequences for the future of the health service right across the UK”. 



She added: “The claim that politicians leading the Leave campaign have made that they would spend more money on our NHS is surely one of the most deceitful and contemptible of all of the claims made. 

“Before you make your choice on Thursday, look at what the leaders of the Leave campaign really think about our NHS.

“Boris Johnson wants patients to be charged for using the NHS, Michael Gove wanted privatisation, Nigel Farage wants the NHS funded by an insurance model rather than government funding.

