How Boris Johnson has gone from 'the clown' to true Tory leadership material

2016-06-24

GETTY

They included former cabinet member Owen Paterson and were not short of big hitters in their group.

But they wanted a politician to lead them to victory who commanded respect but had that charisma which would appeal to the millions undecided voters.

Even for his harshest critics Boris Johnson was obviously the only top politician who would fit that bill.

The man who charmed his way to winning a Labour city to become the Mayor of London.

 Boris is the life and soul of the party but you wouldn't want him to drive you home afterwards

Tory Amber Rudd

But the Tory MPs were to be disappointed.

"The trouble is I am not an outer," is said to have been his reply. It was a blow and left Vote Leave without an obvious leader.

But still there was hope. He refused to declare himself publicly until David Cameron, his old friend and rival, came back with a deal from Brussels and he was also well aware that whatever the Referendum result the next Tory leader was likely to be one backed by the eurosceptics.

As the weeks passed though questions were being asked about whether he was really the right man to lead.

True he had run London but the job of Mayor does not have the day to day pressure of a referendum campaign and pales into insignificance when it comes to what is expected of a Prime Minister.

He was after all the celebratory politician, more at home on the Have I Got News for You set than he was in the Commons.

Did Leave need a serious figure or the man dubbed by his critics as "the clown", a maverick individual not a team player?

But then came the moment of truth. Mr Cameron returned with his much vaunted renegotiation deal, which amounted to nothing.

Almost immediately Justice Secretary Michael Gove came out for Brexit and then on Sunday, 21 February, Boris declared that he too was now an outer.

GETTY

It was the lift that the campaign needed. At last it had two men who combined intellectual and organisation powers of Gove with the X factor of Boris. But would it work?

As the early shots were fired in the campaign there was still the distraction of elections not least for the person to replace Brois as London Mayor, but with that over and Mr Johnson freed of his City Hall responsibilities he was unleashed for his first speech on 7 May.

The speech - "The liberal cosmopolitan case for Brexit" - set the tone of the campaign. It was visionary and appealed to a broad section of the population.

It made the economic case for Brexit, brought in the notion of restoring democracy and taking back control. It was Churchillian.

The campaign never really looked back afterwards and nor did Bojo.

GETTY

But there was more to come.

On the 11 May, the Vote Leave bus was launched in Truro. Any doubts that Mr Johnson was a leader evaporated that day.

As he walked through the streets of the Cornish city he was mobbed by adoring fans, people stopped him for selfies, he was bizarrely handed a bunch of asparagus which he brandished as he urged the onlookers to vote for independence day.

The adoration was repeated at every stop the bus made all round the country. It was like somebody had sprinkled star dust.

But the maverick was never far away. Which other politician could get away with having a campaign stunt of auctioning off a dairy cow?

Boris Johnson's funniest pictures

There was one last question though. Could he take the pressure of a full on election debate? Would the maverick slip and look like a clown?

He answered it firmly with powerful performances on the ITV debate and then the BBC's Wembley jamboree.

On ITV, Tory energy secretary Amber Rudd went blue on blue and led a series of personal attacks on Boris with the help of SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon and Labour shadow Business Secretary Angela Eagle.

"Boris is the life and soul of the party but you wouldn't want him to drive you home afterwards," said Ms Rudd in a catty prescripted moment.

GETTY

But Mr Johnson rose above it. He did not respond and he ignored the snide assertions that he was Brexit only to be PM.

He worked well with his team mates Andrea Leadsom and Labour's Gisela Stuart and they won the ITV debate at a canter.

He faced a different test in Wembley. Fellow Tory Ruth Davidson is a powerful debater and took him on with the issues.

But at the end it was Boris who received the standing ovation and loudest cheers.

Anybody watching knew that whatever the referendum result, this man is no clown and is ready to lead his party and country into whatever future it has.

