What does Europe REALLY think? The FRENCH want Brexit more than any other EU nation

2016-06-21

GETTY - STOCK

A German poll has revealed who really backs Britain staying in the EU and who is sceptical of the consequences Brexit could spark.

The Bertelsmann Stiftung study of 10,992 people from the 28 EU member countries showed only a small majority wants to keep Britain in the EU.

Only 54 per cent want Britain to remain, while 21 per cent are for Brexit and 25 per cent have no opinion.

French citizens were found to be the most likely to want Brexit, with only 41 per cent saying they would prefer Britain to stay a member of the EU.

12 reasons why you should vote IN or OUT of EU

 Forty-five per cent believe that the EU would be worse off without Britain

A quarter (25 per cent) of French respondents said Britain should leave. 

In contrast, Germans, Italians, Polish and Spanish people voted mainly in favour of British people staying.

The survey also revealed how just 45 per cent of people said the EU would be worse off without Britain, while 10 per cent said the situation would get better if the UK stayed.

The rest believe that nothing would change.

A small majority of continental Europeans are sure a Brexit would weaken the economy of Europe, while a third fears that the EU would lose its influence on global politics. 

GETTY

Meanwhile, hardly anyone outside of Britain believes that Brexit would have negative consequences for their own home country, according to the survey.

This is especially true for German and Polish people who were revealed to be most in fear of the consequences Brexit could cause.

Majorities in France, Italy and Spain on the other hand believe that little would change.

The study further revealed that 13 per cent of pro-Brexiters even believe their country will be economically worse off if Britain were to leave.

In terms of happiness within the EU, just 15 per cent are happy with the way things are and only 30 per cent want less from Europe.

The mood is different in Britain where 43 per cent want less integration, 31 per cent want more and 26 per cent are happy with the way it is. 

The British are the only ones surveyed who do not have a majority that want to deepen integration.

More than 50 per cent in every other country are for closer unions within the bloc, especially from respondents in Spain and Italy.

In terms of EU citizens outside of Britain voting if there was a referendum in their own country, just five of the six biggest states said they would want to remain members of the EU. 

