The EU IS undemocratic but let's not close our borders, writes PETER EGAN

2016-06-17

GETTY

He is an ardent animal welfare champion and the UK Ambassador for Animals Asia, a charity that works tirelessly to end the practice of bear bile farming and improve the welfare of animals in China and Vietnam.

He writes:

Like many people I’m confused. I feel like I’m participating in a divorce without the help of any constructive opinion regarding a settlement. Everything I hear is scaremongering or knee jerk reactions. Perhaps the sanest voice I’ve heard is from Yanis Varoufakis (former Finance Minister of Greece).

I watched him on the Andrew Marr show and was surprised to hear, after the dust up he had with the EU during the prolonged negotiations for the Greek bailout and the austerity measures imposed, that he was encouraging a vote to stay. His point of view is that there is a democracy vacuum in the EU which can only be solved from the inside.

So, in order to regain what we should have by right, we must sign up to an undemocratic system and then work from inside to democratise it. I think politicians have always felt uncomfortable about democracy. We have for the first time in our lives politicians who have never worked at anything other than being politicians.

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

That makes me feel that with no other life experience, they live by political dogma on the one hand, or vested interest financially on the other.We, in the real world, are subject to ever changing circumstances as a result of decisions made by banks, big business, market changes driven by profit and not by care, these demands are then translated into political imperatives depending upon the left or the right.

We keep trying to focus as a nation on the middle ground but keep falling off the edge on one side or the other. My politics are centre left but I feel deeply betrayed by New Labour. Its biggest exponents all seem to have become moguls, perhaps with the exception of Gordon Brown.

I feel equally betrayed by the Conservative Party, who have clearly had a compassion bypass. Is there a better system to be had in Europe? Well, clearly not at the moment.

GETTY

GETTY

I love living in the UK. I love our melting pot existence and the wonderful mix of cultures we have absorbed. It is only right and fair that we absorb these cultures as a result of our imperial past. We are now taking on, but not entirely absorbing, a new generation of immigration. This time not through imperial guilt but by freedom of movement.

The mass movement of people throughout Europe, and indeed the world, is putting huge pressure on the infrastructure of most nation states. I believe this movement will continue to happen regardless of our membership of an undemocratic EU.

GETTY

In my experience, all the people I have encountered who have moved to the UK since our borders were opened, have been incredibly skilled, hard working and not free loaders. I think the skills brought in from Poland, Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania has also raised the game for many young Britons and exposed the dreadful lack of training offered to young people in the UK.

I believe our problems will not be solved by closing our borders. So which way am I going to vote? Probably Yes to stay in – but still thinking about it!

