‘EU referendum? Cameron called it to BLACKMAIL EUROPE’ Putin makes shock Brexit claim

2016-06-17

GETTY

The Russian leader was speaking on the Brexit debate for the first time.

It follows politicians including Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond saying Putin would welcome a Leave vote as it would strengthen his hand with the EU breaking up.

But Putin refused to comment on the result he wanted, before suggesting the Prime Minister had called the referendum to "scare" Europe.

Seeming to suggest Mr Cameron would regret calling the referendum with an Out vote currently leading, Putin said: "There is a great problem with Brexit. Why did he initiate this vote in the first place? Why did he do that? 



“So he wanted to blackmail Europe or to scare someone, what was the goal if he was against?"

He added the result was too close to call and also said he did not want to express his view on whether Brexit would be a good idea.

The Russian strongman said: "I want to say it is none of our business, it is the business of the people of the UK. I have my own opinion on this matter, I cannot talk about the result yet - no one knows about the result yet, I think it is 50-50 with a certain margin of error.

”Who can predict it? No one can predict it. I have my own opinion on this matter - whether it is good or bad - but I will refrain from giving the forecast. I think it would be improper on my part to do that.



GETTY

"Whatever I say will be interpreted to the benefit of either side, that's the business of the EU and the people of the UK.

Putin added, in the interview with Press Association, there were both benefits and negatives linked with being in the European Union.

He highlighted the stringent fishing rules as a particular issue.





He said: "Different experts have different estimates about whether Brexit will benefit Great Britain or not, some say it will be to the detriment and some say the EU will be more stable and stronger.

"In the UK itself for example - they are going down in boats saying how hard it is to live with restrictions in fishing. Yes they have a problem, well there are some benefits in other sectors. If you have to weigh all these things it is very complicated."



