Remain MP grilled by voter who 'just doesn't understand' why EU wants to keep expanding

2016-06-20

Mr Umunna, MP for Streatham, was grilled over the EU's alleged expansionist agenda as he made the case for Remain with just days left in the campaign.

The Labour politician and former shadow cabinet member was speaking on the Nick Ferrari show on LBC when he was taken to task over the EU.

Harry, from the Wirral, asked: "I can’t understand why Europe insists on taking over other countries to create a huge power bloc.

"I just don’t understand it."

WHICH COUNTRIES ARE WAITING TO JOIN THE EU?

LBC•GETTY

He continued: "It keeps extending and taking over former Soviet bloc countries and has its eyes on Turkey eventually.

"Why on earth does it want to keep expanding?"

Harry all questioned the wisdom of "squaring up" to Vladimir Putin and Russia, citing the clashes over Ukraine as an example.

In reply, Mr Umunna said: "The EU does not seek to take over these countries no more than it seeks to take over the UK.

"What the EU is an association of countries where we chose to pool sovereignty so we can achieve more together than we can alone."

He added: "I don’t agree with this idea that by being part of the EU you are taken over by it."

Mr Umunna also added his voice to those condemning Nigel Farage and Ukip over their campaign poster using a group of Syrian migrants with the slogan "Breaking Point".

GETTY

 don’t agree with this idea that by being part of the EU you are taken over by it

Chuka Umunna

On Monday, Baroness Warsi defected to the Remain side after previously supporting Leave.

A row has developed over whether Baroness Warsi was ever actually supporting Brexit or not, but Mr Umunna insists she was.

He said: "For her, the poster that was unveiled by Ukip stepped over the line last week.

"I didn’t hear all of your exchanges with Nigel Farage about this in the previous half and hour, but he seems to have suggester that had it not been for the absolutely appalling and tragic death of Jo Cox there wouldn’t be the row about the poster that there was.

"I can assure you that sometimes before the news broke, people were condemning it. I condemned it.

"It was a vile and disgusting poster… it would have been condemned."

Mr Farage has accused the prime minister of trying to take advantage of the death of Labour MP Jo Cox.

Mr Farage said: "What we're seeing here is the Prime Minister and Remain campaign trying to conflate the actions of one crazed individual with the motives of half of Britain who think we should get back control of our borders and do it sensibly.

"And I think that's quite wrong the way it's being done.

"As for the poster itself it's not wrong, in fact Mr Cameron, it's a photograph.

"It's a photograph that appeared on the front page of almost every national newspaper last year for day after day.

"And if you read the slogan it says 'the EU has failed us all'."

MAPPED: EXPANDING EMPIRE OF EU

