Backlash as LA homeowners Posh and Becks vow they're ‘passionate’ about Britain and the EU

2016-06-21

GETTY 

The celebrity couple waded into the momentous EU referendum debate this morning, declaring they will be voting to Remain because they are “passionate” about Britain. 

But it is well known that the pair, who have four children, actually spend part of their year in Los Angeles, America. 

And eagle-eyed Twitter users were not going to let the Beckham’s forget this. 

One said: “Considering David Beckham, he lives in USA in a ivory tower. Why should he even say anything."

 Considering David Beckham, he lives in USA in a ivory tower. Why should he even say anything

Another said: “This is a man loaded with money living anywhere he wishes in the world. We must take David seriously. Think NOT.” 

While another simply tweeted: “Doesn’t he live in the States? “

It came after the former footballer wrote to his 24.3million Instagram followers: “We live in a vibrant and connected world where together as a people we are strong.

“I’m passionate about my country and whatever the result of Thursday's referendum, we will always be Great.”

And a row erupted between Victoria and LeaveEU, when the anti-Brussels campaigners tweeted Eurosceptic remarks which the former Spice Girls singer reportedly said. 

With a photo of Victoria alongside the quote: “The Euro bureaucrats are destroying every bit of national identity and individuality. We must keep our national individuality,” alongside the caption “should have listened to the missus, David. #LeaveEU.”

But Victoria was quick to defend previous comments, insisting she had made them 20 years ago.

GETTY 



She wrote: “In response to the @leave.eu campaign who have today tried to put spin on quotes made 20 years ago about keeping or losing the pound, I have to say strongly my comments were not about this referendum and should not be missed in this way!” 

The clothes designer added: “I believe in my country, I believe in a future for my children where we are stronger together and I support the #remain campaign.” 

The pair are the latest in a string of multimillionaire celebrities to come out in support of the Remain campaign. 

Bob Geldof was blasted as a “condescending billionaire” who used his wealth to “drown out” working class people when he stuck two fingers up at pro-Leave fishermen on the Thames. 

Defending his actions, Geldof bizzarely compared a vote to leave Brussels in Thursday’s EU referendum to Britain’s involvement in the Iraq war. 

GETTY 

GETTY 

