'Astonishing arrogance' Liam Fox blasts top EU bureaucrat Jean-Claude Juncker

2016-06-23

Dr Fox was reacting to Mr Juncker’s warning to Britain that "out means out" ahead of the historic EU referendum.

The president of the European Commission said there would be no more reforms to Britain’s membership following David Cameron’s renegotiations in February.

Dr Fox told LBC: "The arrogance of Mr Juncker has been astonishing.

"Just a few weeks ago he said there would be no dealing with deserters.

LBC•GETTY

"For a country like the UK – which twice in the last century has saved Europe from fascism and its own folly – I thought that was so insulting.

"One of the words that has been dropped by the Remain side has been 'reformed'.

"They have notably dropped that from everything they have said.

"There isn’t a reformed EU at all and there isn’t going to be a reformed EU.

"It is continuing on the same direction it has always had – towards ever closer union."

Dr Fox added: "We had the British Prime Minister, who wanted genuine reform, reduced to a political version of Oliver Twist, going around the European capitals asking for a little bit more."

GETTY

 For a country like the UK – which twice in the last century has saved Europe from fascism and its own folly – I thought that was so insulting

Liam Fox

Speaking on Wednesday, ahead of polls opening in the referendum, Mr Juncker told reporters in Brussels: "The British policy makers and the British voters have to know that there will not be any kind of renegotiation.

"We have concluded a deal with the prime minister, he got the maximum he could receive, we gave the maximum we could give.

"So there will be no renegotiation, not on the agreement we found in February, nor as far as any kind of treaty negotiations are concerned.

"Out is out."

Reacting to his comments Michael Gove said: "The Remain campaign has been claiming in recent days that if you vote to stay in the EU then there could be further reform.

A Royal Wedding, The Wombles and a new James Bond

"The President of the EU, Jean-Claude Juncker, has made very clear today that will not happen."

Alex Salmond, former Scottish First Minister and Remain supporter, said: "I don’t see that [Mr Juncker’s comments] as a problem.

"I think he is doing no more than speaking the truth.

"I happen to think the case for Europe is more important than the prime minister's negotiations."

