Loud and proud Daily Express praised for leading crusade to get Britain out of the EU

2016-06-24

GETTY

As referendum results poured in, our crusade for freedom from Brussels was widely praised for more than five years of relentless campaigning.

It is widely acknowledged to be the most ambitious media campaign in newspaper history. While many mocked the crusade as a fringe issue when it was launched in November 2010, it forced an EU referendum on to the political agenda and has succeeding in bringing the country to the brink of a new era of national independence.

Over more than 2,000 days of crusading, Daily Express front pages have time and again highlighted the issues of mass migration, financial waste and ridiculous Brussels diktats that have infuriated millions of UK citizens.

 The newspaper played a huge role in getting the referendum in the first place

Tory backbencher Peter Bone

Other newspapers have belatedly caught up with the Express by calling for a Leave vote in the last few days. Ukip leader Nigel Farage said: “The Daily Express has been at the forefront of the pro-Brexit movement loud and proud.

“Whether we talk about taking back democratic control or control of our borders, the Express crusade has played a crucial role in advancing this campaign to get our country back.”

GETTY

Tory backbencher Peter Bone, MP for Wellingborough, said: “The newspaper played a huge role in getting the referendum in the first place.

“I remember walking up Downing Street to deliver the Daily Express petition to the Prime Minister. It has carried on campaigning, set the standard and the other papers followed.

“The Daily Express can be proud of the role it has played.”

GETTY

Leading Labour campaigner for Brexit, Vauxhall MP Kate Hoey, said: “The Express has been the only paper that has consistently stood up as the voice of people who have been totally ignored by the establishment for years.”

In January 2013, the Daily Express crusade scored a historic victory in helping to force the PM in committing to a promise to hold an in-out EU referendum. That promise became a reality when the Tories won a majority at the last election.

