Christians should help Britain and vote LEAVE, says FORMER POPE ADVISER

2016-06-22

GETTY

In the name of money, why slaughter all other Christian traditions in Europe by securing the selfish club, Fortress Europe, ignoring the plight of the developing countries in the British Commonwealth?

It would, one would have thought, be the first duty of Christians in the EU to help the poor in the developing countries, many members of the British Commonwealth.

The EU absolutely refuses to do this: instead, the EU's dumping practices is causing serious poverty and hardship in these countries.

Are the Cardinals at Westminster and the members of the Anglican hierarchy not aware of the pleas from Caritas and other Christian aid organisations to tell off the EU for these cruel and selfish policies?

Many Christians in the developing countries in the Commonwealth, are stunned to see themselves abandoned not only by the old Mother country, but now even by the Church.

So some want to be 'multicultural'? But we were multicultural! What could be more multicultural than the British Commonwealth? But we threw that all away to join the selfish Club of the European Union.

Not realising that they have their priorities wrong, some now try to be 'multicultural' in an 'artificial' sense.

By supporting the Remain Campaign - some in the Church are promoting EU's little known (or even secret) mobility schemes, encouraging a further flow of migrants from totally different cultural and religious background, virtually all Muslim, from North Africa, Middle East and Asia into the EU. 

I am not speaking about the poor refugees from war zones, the real refugees who, of course, deserve our help and compassion. I am speaking about the unauthorised and virtually unknown and secret schemes of the EU to encourage citizens in non-EU countries to move to the EU area.

The EU left the Outer Borders wide open for anyone to come into the EU.

GETTY

The EU continues to encourage what it calls 'mobility', especially from its European Neighbourhood Partners.

Even in November 2015, at the beginning of the Migration Crisis, the EU was not willing to change its approach from encouraging citizens of non-EU countries from coming to the EU Member States. On the contrary, the Commission spoke much about the 'success' of the Project The European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP).

This initiative had been launched in 2004, eleven years earlier, and this scheme actually encouraged 'mobility' and 'migration', into the European Union.

EU’s European Neighbourhood Policy includes the The Eastern Partnership (EaP), a joint initiative involving the EU, its Member States and six Eastern European 'partners': Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine. Citizens in all these countries are on the path of having increasing rights to come and settle in the EU.

Are we safer in the EU? Certainly not: The Eastern Partnership Scheme would seem to step very much on the toes of the Russian bear, increasing serious tensions with Russia's traditional sphere of interest.



Then the EU has also another little known structure, the ENP - European Neighbourhood Partners– and under this framework the Commission established EUROMED, a Euro-Mediterranean Partnership, consisting of Albania, Algeria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Mauritania, Montenegro, Morocco, Palestine, Tunisia and Turkey. Among these, Morocco benefits from an advanced status in its relations with the EU and Tunisia has a ‘privileged’ Partnership

Turkey is also specifically ‘privileged’ in this Partnership Scheme. The EU is now accelerating Turkey's membership application, a country with 80 million inhabitants.

Turkey's population equals that of thirteen EU countries and will, when Turks become EU members, totally change the demographic and religious structure of Europe.

The Remain Camp insists that Turkish membership is decades off. If that were true why did the EU Parliament vote (by 375 to 133) on 19th April 2016, six weeks ago, to make Turkish a new official language in the EU?

GETTY

GETTY

Another EU Regional Development and Protection Programmes (RDPPs) in North Africa and the Horn of Africa is becoming operational in 2016, as well as the already existing RDPP in the Middle East (Jordan, Lebanon and Iraq).

The EU stretches itself even further and says that: "The EU should increase its outreach to partners in sub-Saharan Africa and ... [engage in] dialogue with the League of Arab States, cooperation with the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC), the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), the African Union, the Arab Maghreb Union countries in the region."

Worrying statements reflect the ambition of the EU to encourage even more migration into the EU countries to assist in case of ‘labour needs’. But nothing is said that the unemployment rate in the EU is running at 8.9%, with 21.651 million unemployed in the EU in 2016.

In Spain the unemployment is running at 20% and among young people almost 45%. The plight especially of young unemployed persons is also acute in other EU Member countries.

GETTY

 What could be more multicultural than the British Commonwealth?

The EU plans and ‘Mobility Schemes’ may sound a little worrying to the EU Member States that are trying to cope with the present influx of migrants. But to the EU it is only the beginning of its ambitious ‘Global Migration Scheme’.

But what about the Commonwealth countries, countries with which the UK share many traditions, history and trade links? No! They are not on the ‘Neighbourhood’ Schemes! Some of the poorer Commonwealth countries are suffering from EU's dumping practices and protectionist attitudes that only benefit the EU-Club. The richer Commonwealth countries, like India, have a booming economy and it would be much better for the UK to trade with India than with the EU.

But the most important element of for a Christian in this debate is to respect all for their faith but surely to give some priority to those with whom we share a common history and, at least in many cases, the common faith of Christianity. So surely we should promote and shelter the interests of the Commonwealth countries rather extending our borders to haul into Europe an overwhelmingly Muslim migration wave.



It may be time to wake up and realise that there are those who are determined to extinguish Christianity in Europe and it would be sad to see even priests and their folds being misled by the lavish propaganda by the EU.

The EU has - contrary to the common belief - not a penny of its own but derives all funds from the Member States, through substantial annual membership fees but also, again through secret manipulations incorporated in the EU Budget as Own Resources (made up by a slice of the VAT in 28 countries!) .

The EU budget for 2016 amounts to €143 billion (all money from the Member States, agricultural levies and the VAT)!

We should take the opportunity to leave while we can: the EU started with a noble aim but somewhere along the line it has been hijacked by people only motivated by greed and their own ambition for power. The EU is now governed by unelected bureaucrats without any accountability to anyone!

GETTY

Professor Ingrid Detter de Frankopan is Lindhagen Professor Emeritus having held the Chair of International Law at Stockholm University. She is a former Fellow of St. Antony’s College and Lady Margaret Hall at Oxford University. She was Adviser to Pope St. John Paul II between 1984 and 2005 and has been Adviser to various Governments during her long and distinguished career in inter-State Conflict resolution.

The book The Suicide of Europe by Ingrid Detter de Frankopan is now available from Amazon.co.uk and from Montesa.Jagellonica@gmx.ch on the internet and from the Economist Bookshop at Waterstones at London School of Economics.

