Fury as German EU chief brands Brexit campaign LIES ordering 'idiotic' UK take 'good deal'

2016-06-18

GETTY

Brussels fat cat Elmar Brok, who is known for his sensational screaming fits at junior officials and drivers, said claims Britain has no control over its border were not true, despite Britain having to conform to EU rules.

The chairman of the European Parliament Committee on Foreign Affairs also said claims Turkey would join the EU in the next four years were a lie.

Turkey is currently in crunch talks to gain visa-free travel to the union, while Vote Leave claims David Cameron wants to “pave the way” for Ankara.

But Mr Brok, who is fighting for more international powers to be granted to the EU superstate, told Express.co.uk: “Everything that is written about immigration is a lie.

“The lie is that Britain has no border control and that Turkey will join the European Union in four years time as Farage has said.

“All this information from the Brexit people is false information.”

The outburst comes as a source revealed to Express.co.uk Mr Brok was prepared to give a statement on immigration to try and sway voters to stay in the EU, as Brussels chiefs start to sweat.

The official overheard Brok calling Britons “idiotic” for wanting fairer policies for migants outside the EU.



GETTY

Mr Brok, who has been riding the EU gravy train since 1980, was heard saying to a British MEP: “So they want Pakistani Muslims instead of Polish Christians?”

When it was made clear the MEP would not discuss the suggestion Mr Brok replied: “I bet you don’t! It’s idiotic!”

But he did ask if a statement on migration “would help” the Remain cause.

Mr Brok denied this meant EU chiefs were considering making a last minute deal on migration to appease voters.

He told Express.co.uk: “No, there is no deal on immigration. Britain got a good deal in February. Now British people must decide.”

GETTY

 Everything that is written about immigration is a lie

Brussels fat cat Elmar Brok

James Carver MEP, who also sits on the foreign affairs committee under Brok claims his German colleague is the one peddling false information.

He said: “We don’t have control of about half of those 300,000 immigrants who come here, who are from the EU.

“The two core principles which cannot be changed within the EU are the euro and the free movement of people.

“If Brexit happens, it will be like the Soviet Union. It will collapse like dominoes and of course the Germans have the most to lose.”

The UKIP MEP told Express.co.uk the German is part of federalist, political elite in Brussels who were planning a new superstate EU.

GETTY

Mr Carver said his insulting outburst was because he’s been “found out”.

He added: “He is a member of the ‘Spinnelli’ group which is a federalist movement. Nothing surprise me from Mr Brok as he has too much to lose.

“Brok once said that it was time to marginalise Britain.”

Elmar Brok is a respected statesman in the European Parliament and seen as a close ally to the German President. 

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

He runs the foreign affairs committee which is behind plans to expand the EU’s powers internationally with a bigger, bolder foreign affairs mandate, including with an EU army. 

He is known in the parliament for his sensational screaming fits – often at junior officials and drivers – where his bellowing can be heard more than a hundred meters away. 

Brok, who travels the world and is treated like a superstar by world leaders in poor countries, has never been a stranger to publicity.

In 2013 he was accused by Femin radicalists from the Ukraine of frequenting the services of prostitutes there who accosted him in Brussels in front of the entrance to the European parliament. Brok later denied the allegations.

