Bit of an own goal? John Barnes rings up Sky after Michael Gove 'outs' him as a 'Leaver'

2016-06-22

The former footballer intervened after the Secretary of State for Justice and Vote Leave campaigner claimed Barnes supported the United Kingdom leaving the European Union.

Mr Gove listed the former Liverpool player as one of the high-profile figures he claimed supported his Brexit campaign.

He said: “There're lots of people from sport like Sol Campbell and John Barnes,” when running through a list of Brexit supporters during an interview with Sky News.

Barnes, who is currently working in South Africa covering the European Championships, said he received a text message from his son informing him of Mr Gove’s claims of support for the Leave Campaign.

Getty

 I was very surprised when I got a text from my son to saying that Mr Gove has said I support the Leave campaign

John Barnes

He said the mistaken belief he backed Brexit came after he had given an interview saying quitting the EU could benefit British footballers in the Premier League. 

Barnes, responding to the Conservative MP’s comments, said: "I was very surprised when I got a text from my son to saying that Mr Gove has said I support the Leave campaign.

"How this happened, I gave an interview stating that for English footballers it would be better off being out of the EU because of course we wouldn’t have all of these European players coming in as easy.

"That was then misinterpreted as that I’m supporting the Leave campaign, I got a phone call the very next day, this is about a month ago, saying 'thank you very much for your support' and I made it categorically clear I don’t.

"Speaking from the point of view from English footballers, it’ll be better off but I don’t support the Leave campaign because that’s a very selfish view just looking at English football. I’ve got to think about what I think is right for the country.

"I’ve made it plain that I do not support them, that I support Remain. 

"They said 'thank you very much, we won’t contact you again'. That is why I am very surprised to hear my name being called."

Barnes, who won 79 caps playing for England, was insistent he didn’t want to become involve in the referendum but felt it necessary to put his point across after being put in the wrong camp.



He said: "I wanted to be left out of it, unfortunately now they’ve brought me back in I really want to tell people how I do feel about it.

"If everybody decided to go their own way, where will the world be? If you look at the history of Britain in the past, being the world leaders from a moral point of view, from a compassionate point of view… we are now the first to jump ship because the going gets tough?

"This is not what, in my opinion, being British is about. It’s a very selfish view. So I understand the problems we have on immigration, but do we have a worse problem than they do in Germany, France and Greece? 

"They have a bigger problem, but they’re there to try and help it, to try and come to a solution by sticking together."

Barnes joins ex-England captain David Beckham who also pledged his support for Remain on Tuesday.

