We cannot waste our last chance to leave the EU, says SIR IAN BOTHAM

2016-06-21

GETTY

I want my grandchildren's children to grow up in a Britain they can be just as proud of. That is the reason I am so passionate about voting to leave the European Union. If we do not make a stand now I am worried it will be too late.

We simply can't trust what the Government tells us about Europe. That is probably why we see them resorting to lowgrade personal insults in television debates. It looks pathetic to most people and shows they have run out of arguments.

 I want a Britain we can all feel proud of

Politicians have never told us the truth about the EU. First they said we were just going into a Common Market - there was nothing about losing control of the laws we make or losing control of our borders.

Then they told us when the EU expanded to Eastern Europe that we would get just a few thousand immigrants a year. Last year it was more than 180,000. Some of them come here without a job or any real qualifications and there is pretty much nothing we can do about them.

Some just turn up and pick up what they can. It is unfair on British workers who have got homes and families to worry about and are having their wages undercut.

SOMEHOW, without any of us really noticing, our politicians gave away the power to take even the most basic precautions to keep us safe. We have to let in convicted murderers, rapists and drug traffickers without any proper checks just because they have an EU passport.

GETTY

There are at least 50 documented cases of these people going on to commit serious crimes in Britain. Sometimes I can't help wondering if their own countries are not just trying to get rid of them.

Then David Cameron told us he would be ready to lead Britain out of the EU if he did not get major concessions from Brussels. He got pretty much zero but now tells us leaving would be a disaster.

We should not believe them when they say they do not want Turkey to join the EU when in fact they have been using British taxpayers' money to get the Turks ready for membership. That would mean 77 million more people having the right to move here. Last time I looked at the map, pretty much all of Turkey was in Asia so I am not sure what they have to do with Europe anyway.

Even with migration continuing "just" at its current level we will have to build a new house every six minutes for the next 20 years.

Our beautiful countryside is what makes Britain the place it is and this island was not designed for 100 million people. I don't want to see it concreted over just because we have no control over our borders.

Concrete sprawl is just one of the ways the EU has hurt rural Britain. As a country dweller I see this and hear it all the time in the farming community round where I live in North Yorkshire.

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

Our dairy farmers are some of the best in the world but they are getting nailed by Brussels. All the Government does is stifle their progress with the crazy rules of the EU's Common Agricultural Policy at the same time as milk prices are going down and down.

We pay twice as much into the CAP as we get back. That means we are handing over billions of pounds every year to European farmers whom we've never met and don't know anything about and paying them to undercut British food.

It would be much better to use some of that cash to support our own farmers in the way that makes sense for them. To do that we'll need to take back our democracy and come up with our own farming policy for the first time in more than 40 years. Anyone who says we are not capable of doing that is talking rubbish.

But I am not sure we can count on the current untrustworthy bunch of politicians to run an independent Britain. David Cameron's father-in-law wrote recently that he thought even if we vote to leave in the referendum, Parliament would try to wriggle out of it because most of them support Remain.

If we vote to leave, Britain is not going to pull up the drawbridge. We are not little Englanders and we don't want to be little Europeans. We have friends all over the world and I know from 30 years' walking the length and breadth of the country raising £25million for charity just what a generous and open people the British really are.

THAT will be the character we show when we leave the EU and reconnect fully with the rest of the world.

I was proud to play cricket for England. In Euro 2016 we are cheering on our historic national football teams but I don't think I can imagine anyone feeling the same passion for a country called the EU. The bureaucrats in Brussels may finally understand this once we in Britain vote to take back control of our own country.

We know most British politicians cannot be trusted on Europe. But now they have put the decision in our hands. It is our chance to stand up and be counted and it may be the last chance for an independent Britain. Let's vote Leave to take back control of our country on Thursday.

