'You're a 21st century Neville Chamberlain' Cameron heckled and mocked in Brexit debate

2016-06-20

BBC

The Prime Minister joined host David Dimbleby on Question Time answering questions over the EU referendum, which now looms only four days away. 

Fighting to stay in the EU, Mr Cameron defended himself, his party and his policies from a range of question on the economy, migration, Turkey and his promise of securing a “reformed EU". 

A fiery vote leave backer took Mr Cameron to town over the changes he secured from Brussels. 

He said: “Mr Cameron, you say your policy that you’ve negotiate with Europe cannot be overruled, it can, so are you really the 21st century Neville Chamberlain waving a piece of paper in the air saying to the public this is what I have, I have this promise where a dictatorship in Europe can overrule it?

“Answer the question yes or no.”

In a bid to defend his position, the PM said: “The other 27 prime ministers and presidents have agreed it and they know if Britain votes to remain they will implement it.

”And I think, you know it this not some empire or dictatorship. 

“We’re proving through this referendum that if Britain wants to leave this organisation we can. we’re a sovereign country.

BBC

“If we choose to leave we can leave.”

Neville Chamberlain was a Tory Prime Minister from 1937 until his resignation in May 1940. In 1938, Mr Chamberlain had had a meeting wth Adolf Hitler and when he returned he proclaimed “peace for our time” while waving a piece of paper. For his part, Hitler said, "He seemed such a nice old man, I thought I'd give him my autograph." A year later, Mr Chamberlain announced Britain was at war with Germany.

And as the debate hated up, another woman queried Mr Cameron’s supposed reforms.

@David_Cameron quitters no, but we know when to cut our losses & move on! #VoteLeave #LeaveEU #Brexit #questiontime

She said: “You keep saying this reformed european union that we’re a part of, yeah fair enough you’ve negotiated some changes which you’ll say is going to make a massive difference to immigration but realistically it’s not going to make a massive difference to the levels of immigration especially considering we have other countries which are about to join the European Union.”

She finished her impassioned statement by exclaiming: “Leave, leave the single market.” 

The incumbent was also forced to justify him remaining as the man in No. 10 if Britain does vote leave. 

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

 Are you really the 21st century Neville Chamberlain waving a piece of paper in the air?

Question Time audience member

One woman asked him directly: “If the country voted to leave, would you call a general election?

“All the parties need to come up with a manifesto so the people, who have taken back control can actually vote the way they want the country to go forward. 

“People voted for you on the basis of a referendum, they didn’t vote for you on the basis of what would happen after the referendum.”

BBC

Another audience member, Louise Riding, continued to probe Mr Cameron on his future in the top job if we vote Brexit.

She said: “When the British public vote to leave, how can you as prime minister possible remain?”

In defence of his job, the Prime Minister tried to outline why he would be staying in power should vote Leave win.

He said: “I will take and obey the instructions of the British people and on that basis I think it’s right to stay.

“I also think it’s not right to muddle up in this referendum the future of this political or that politician.”

And David Dimbleby also chipped in, challenging the PM on what grounds he could possibly still serve if the UK votes out on Thursday. 

BBC

The host said: “You’ve said this referendum is more important than any general election, if you lost a general election you’d be out of Number 10, so if you lose this referendum why won’t you be out of Number 10 like that?”

As Mr Cameron vainly tried to explain his reasoning, the veteran host added he would be doing things he did not want to do, which drew an immense applause from the crowd. 

He was also taken to task over the issue of Turkey joining the EU, claiming that it would not happen for at least “30 years”, when he would inevitably not be the PM. One viewer tweeted: "@david_cameron just said on #bbcqt he won't be pm in 30 years time. At this rate sweetheart you won't be PM in 30 days time #EUref".

He refused to be drawn on the issue, instead brushing it off as something which is “not going to happen in the short term”. 

Overall he was accused of lying, scaremongering, relying on too many “experts” with no actual substance and comparing Brexit to Isis.

The BBC show was the last televised appearance the PM will make before the historic vote. 

