EU expansion: Which countries are waiting to JOIN?

2016-06-22

DAILY EXPRESS

Turkey and the Balkan states of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Albania are now waiting in line to join the EU. 

The EU has now promised to "re-energise" Turkey’s bid to join in return for helping to deal with the ongoing migrant crisis. 

Turkey, which has 75 million citizens, first applied to join what was then the European Economic Community back in 1987. 

Serbia has been given the green light from Brussels to formally start negotiations as part of its bid to join the EU by 2020. 

Kosovo and Bosnia and Herzegovina have also been promised the prospect of joining when they are ready to.

Iceland decided against joining the EU last year after applying for membership in 2009. 

Daily Express

Britain would be obliged to pay nearly £1.8 billion by 2020 to encourage Albania, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Turkey to join the EU, according to research from Vote Leave. 

The UK government agreed to pay £169.5 million a year under the EU’s Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance, plus a further £640 million to Turkey under the recent deal.  

Vote Leave chair Gisela Stuart, a Labour MP, said: “Rather than sending money abroad to countries that want to join the EU I believe we should be spending our money on our priorities here in the UK.

“Instead of giving an extra 88 million people - more than our entire population - access to the NHS I believe it would be safer to take back control.” 

As well as the cost of expanding the EU, Brexit campaigners have raised concerns that it would lead to a surge in migrants and weaken border security.  

Eurosceptic Conservative MP Iain Duncan Smith said letting Albania, Serbia and Turkey into the EU could undermine Britain’s security

He said: “Letting them into Europe's open border policy will make it harder for us to stop criminals and terrorists from these countries coming to the UK.” 



The founding countries of the EU were Belgium, Germany, France, Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands.

The UK, Denmark, Ireland joined in 1973, followed by Greece, Spain, Portugal, Austria, Sweden and Finland.

In 2004, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Cyprus, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary, Malta, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia joined. 

Bulgaria and Romania became EU members in 2007 and Croatia was the last country to join in 2013. 



Any European country can apply for membership as long as it respects EU’s democratic values and human rights. 

It must have an economy that can cope with the EU’s market forces and be willing to accept established EU law and practice. 



