Nigel Farage: David Cameron is ‘trying to conflate’ Jo Cox killing with EU referendum

2016-06-20

LBC • GETTY

The Ukip leader hit back after David Cameron last night claimed the Brexit campaigner had been guilty of an attempt to “frighten people, to scare them, to divide people” ahead of Thursday’s historic vote.

Mr Farage blasted the Tory leader for posting a link on his Twitter account to Mrs Cox’s final article arguing for Britain the remain in the EU on June 23.

And he claimed a top Tory’s decision to abandon Brexit and support the Remain campaign today was “the biggest put-up job I have ever seen”.

Mr Farage spoke out after the Prime Minister last night criticised the Ukip leader on BBC’s Question Time as “just wrong” for unveiling a poster of migrants walking through Europe emblazoned with the slogan ‘Breaking Point’.

The controversial advert was denounced by campaigners on both sides of the Brexit debate.

Asked to comment on the Prime Minister’s criticism of him, Mr Farage told LBC Radio this morning: “Well what do you expect it’s a Prime Minister in trouble.”

Mrs Cox was fatally shot and stabbed in her Batley and Spen constituency last Thursday.

Tommy Mair, 52, will appear at the Old Bailey today charged with the politician’s murder.

PA

Mr Farage said: “What we're seeing here is the Prime Minister and Remain campaign trying to conflate the actions of one crazed individual with the motives of half of Britain who think we should get back control of our borders and do it sensibly.

“And I think that's quite wrong the way it's being done.

“As for the poster itself it's not wrong, in fact Mr Cameron, it's a photograph.

“It's a photograph that appeared on the front page of almost every national newspaper last year for day after day.

“And if you read the slogan it says 'the EU has failed us all'.”

 The idea that this one crazed individual committed this ghastly act because of the referendum debate is nonsense

Nigel Farage

The Ukip leader said German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s decision to allow all Syrian refugees in Europe into the country last year “was a huge mistake”, adding: “It has led to division between European countries the likes of which we've not seen since the project began.”

He said: “That poster says to me, and says to you I hope, why are we members of this failing organisation.

“Surely better to take back control of our own lives.”

Mr Farage said there was “nothing” he had said in the course of the EU referendum campaign “that’s been inciteful in any way at all”.

He also claimed the Scottish independence referendum in 2014 was “far more visceral and far more unpleasant” than the debate over Britain’s EU membership.

He said: “The idea that this one crazed individual committed this ghastly act because of the referendum debate is nonsense.”



Commenting on his own campaigning, he added: “I have tried to challenge the assumptions of our political class on the European question, on the open-door immigration question and I have been roundly abused and condemned for doing so.

“But a lot of the things that I've spoken about are now part of mainstream debate and the country will make it's mind up on Thursday 

“I think as part of a democratic process that is a good and healthy thing.”

Yesterday, the Prime Minister posted a link on his Twitter account to Mrs Cox’s final article in which she argued “we are stronger, safer and better off in” the EU.

Asked to comment on Mr Cameron’s tweet, the Ukip leader said: “I think there are Remain camp supporters out there who are using this tragic death to try to give the impression that this isolated horrific incident is somehow linked to arguments that have been made by myself or Michael Gove or anybody else in this campaign and frankly that is wrong.”

Challenged over whether he thought this was ‘political opportunism’ from Downing Street, Mr Farage added: “I think people are intelligent enough to make there minds up on that.”

When I invited Sayeeda Warsi to join the Leave campaign, she declined. Fair enough, obviously. But how is this a "defection"?

Former Conservative Party chairman Baroness Warsi today revealed she had decided to now back Remain over Brexit due to Ukip’s controversial poster.

She told The Times: “That ‘breaking point’ poster really was - for me - the breaking point to say, ‘I can’t go on supporting this’.

“Are we prepared to tell lies, to spread hate and xenophobia just to win a campaign?

“For me that’s a step too far.”

Mr Farage highlighted how Vote Leave member Dan Hannan this morning revealed how he had invited Baroness Warsi to join the Leave campaign but she had declined.

Mr Farage said: “This is the biggest put up job I have ever seen.”

He hit back at Baroness Warsi for being ”constantly abusive about everything I've said and done and Ukip's said and done for the last few years”, adding: “She never supported Britain leaving in the first place, it's utter nonsense.”

