Sturgeon plots to RIP BRITAIN APART: SNP demands Scotland independence after EU vote

2016-06-24

GETTY

The historic referendum revealed Leave won thanks to a surge of votes in the north of England and Wales, but the polls showed north of the border overwhelmingly wanted to remain in the EU. 

Scotland voted 62 per cent to 32 per cent to stay in the EU. 

Following the referendum, First Minister Nicola Sturgeon has confirmed that a second Scottish independence referendum is “on the table”. 

The SNP called, and lost, a referendum in 2014 by 55 per cent to 44 per cent. 

In the wake of the the UK voting to sever ties with Europe, Ms Sturgeon called it “democratically unacceptable” for Scotland to also be dragged out. 

Confirming her position, she said she could not let the overwhelming majority of Scottish voters wishing to stay in the EU be ignored. 



She said: “It is therefore stating the obvious option of second referendum must be on the table and is is on the table.”

In a press conference, she lamented the result saying: “It’s not a situation I wanted Scotland or the UK to be in.” 

There was the possibility if Scotland had voted to become independent in 2014 they could have been forced out the EU, a driving factor for many voting to stay in. 

There was now a “significant and material change” to the circumstances of two years ago, and Ms Sturgeon said: “Scotland should have the right to hold another referendum if there are significant and material change to the circumstances in 2014 such as Scotland being taken out of EU.

“Scotland faces that prospect.”

GETTY

 The people of Scotland see their future as part of the European Union

Nicola Sturgeon

But in a shock move, the politician announced she had been in talks with newly-elected London Mayor, Sadiq Khan. 

Aside from the rest of the UK, London and Scotland voted to Remain in the EU. 

The pair are thought to be in talks over how to make that a reality. 

She said there was a “clear common cause between us.”

Ms Sturgeon will also schedule talks with the heads of the other member states and the president of the EU Commission, communicated Scotland’s desire to stay in the EU. 

She wanted to make: “Absolutely clear I intend to take all possible steps and explore all options to give effect to how people in Scotland voted, to secure our continued place in the EU and single market.” 

The Scottish government will begin drawing up legislation for a second referendum. 



Brexit: What to expect next

Leader of the Scottish Conservatives, Ruth Davidson, has said that “stability” needs to come first in the wake of Brexit. 

She called on both the UK and Scottish government to "work together for the benefit of all people in Scotland".

She said: "He restored the UK economy from the depths of the financial crisis, he pushed ahead with a series of necessary social reforms, and, in Scotland, delivered on devolution.

"I am proud to have served alongside him and, earlier this morning, thanked him for his service on behalf of the party in Scotland."

She added: "His decision to remain in post over the short term is the right one, and will help ensure greater stability in the days ahead. 

“It is right that he has already spoken to Nicola Sturgeon to ensure the Scottish government is involved in the negotiations that will follow.”



All 32 councils in Scotland voted to Remain. 

Overall, 1,661,191 voters backed Remain in Scotland, with 1,018,322 voting for Leave.

Moray had the closest result, with Remain beating its rival by just 119 votes. 

Overall, across the United Kingdom the Leave camp won by 52 per cent to 48 per cent. 

Ms Sturgeon’s predecessor, Alex Salmond, said she could well manoeuvre another independence referendum as the SNP manifesto states that another could be called if there was “significant and material” change in circumstances. 



GETTY

He said he was "quite certain Nicola Sturgeon would implement the SNP manifesto".

Turnout for the historic election was high across the UK.

In Scotland’s biggest cities, Glasgow voted to stay by 67 per cent, compared with 33 per cent. 

In Edinburgh a staggering 74 per cent voted to Remain compared with 26 per cent to Leave. 



The Scotland Stronger In Europe campaign said the Remain majority was “exceptional”. 

Spokesman John Edward, said: "We are proud that every single local authority area in Scotland voted Remain with an overall lead of 24 points over Leave - that clearly stands out as an exceptional result compared to the rest of the UK.

"Scotland even recorded a higher level of support to stay in the European Union than in the 1975 referendum.

"We are pleased to have won well in Scotland, but of course the only result that decides the issue is the UK-wide vote."



GETTY

In the wake of Brexit, panic has gripped international markets and the sterling has plummeted to its lowest level not seen since 1985. 

The UK prepares for an economic recession as the beleaguered and lengthy process of having the EU, expected to take about two years, begins.

The possibility of borders between Scotland and England, and Ireland and Northern Ireland, have been mooted. 



