REVEALED: British voters feel 'bullied' by Remain campaign in the EU referendum

2016-06-23

GETTY

The ComRes survey of 2,000 voters comes as the referendum race goes right to the wire 2,037 days after the Daily Express kicked off the crusade to get Britain out of the EU, back in November 2010. 

And as voters make their decision, new evidence emerged of a plan by Brussels to take control of national taxation. 

According to papers released yesterday, European Parliament discussions will be held in September over plans to bring national budgets under EU control and harmonise them. 

With the referendum race neck-and-neck, an Opinium poll put Leave ahead by 45 per cent to 44 per cent. SurveyMonkey’s poll of 3,969 voters has seen Remain take the lead on 50 per cent to Leave’s 47 per cent. 

Meanwhile, freeofficefinder.com carried out a survey of 1,000 office workers from 10 cities and found Exeter with 50.1 per cent was the most pro-Brexit city, followed by Leicester on 47.3 per cent and Bristol on 45.5 per cent. 

All three show clear leads over Remain. But it is the ComRes poll that triggered criticism that David Cameron has led a Remain campaign that has “bullied” voters and branded Leave supporters as “racists” for raising concerns over lack of democracy and uncontrolled immigration. 

The poll, commissioned by the Conservative Woman website, shows eight in 10 voters feel “political correctness” stopped them debating the referendum properly. 

 British people have never felt their freedom to speak more constrained

Kathy Gyngell

It also reveals 61 per cent want people who criticise Islam to be protected from new “hate crime” legislation. 

Kathy Gyngell, co-editor of The Conservative Woman, said: “This EU referendum is the most critical vote on Britain’s future since the Second World War and yet the British people have never felt their freedom to speak more constrained. 

"The Remain campaign has hysterically pointed the finger of blame and shame. 

“Conducting such a vote in a climate where we must watch what we say for fear of being labelled and accused of sowing division or inciting hatred is nothing less than Orwellian.



"I am voting Leave because I don’t want to be bullied. That is exactly what has happened – we have been bullied out of free speech.”

As campaigning continued until late into the final day, Mr Cameron was joined in Bristol by Labour’s former deputy leader Harriet Harman and his predecessor as Tory PM, Sir John Major.

Sir John branded the Brexit camp “the grave diggers of our prosperity” who would have to answer for their “lies”. 

GETTY

He said leaving the EU would be a “disproportionate” response to migration concerns and the country would live to regret it for a “long time to come”. 

In a show of unity for Remain, Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn was flanked by London Mayor Sadiq Khan, Welsh First Minister Carwyn Jones and Scottish Labour leader Kezia Dugdale as the party made its final pitch at a rally in the capital. 

Mr Khan described the vote as “the fight of our lives”. Campaigners for Remain hailed a pro-EU letter to The Times, signed by 1,285 business chiefs employing 1.75 million workers – including 51 FTSE100 companies and 910 small businesses. 

GETTY

They said Brexit would mean “uncertainty for our firms, less trade with Europe and fewer jobs”. But sugar giant Tate & Lyle told employees leaving the EU would benefit the business and protect jobs. 

The Leave campaign highlighted comments by Markus Kleber, head of the BDI – or federation of German industries – who urged the EU to agree a free trade deal if the UK does leave. 

He warned it would be “very, very foolish” to attempt to impose tariffs. Britain’s leading manufacturer and entrepreneur Sir James Dyson also urged people to back Leave. But nine MPs astonished constituents by refusing to declare how they will vote.

