Beachcomber: 99 years old and STILL bearing up well...

2016-06-20

 

By nature, he is a bear of few words, only speaking when something is really bothering him, but last week he twice deluged me with questions about football and yesterday morning he was at it again at breakfast time.

As soon as he said, “Good morning,” I knew that I was not going to be allowed to concentrate on my kedgeree in silence.

“Good morning,” I replied, casting a glance through the window at the pouring rain.

“I do not mean that the weather is good,” he said. “I meant I wish you a good morning. And while we’re talking, perhaps I could ask you a question that has been bothering me.”

“I fear I have already told you all I know about Euro 2016,” I said. “It’s not football this time,” he said: “It’s the European referendum. There’s one vital point that neither side has seen fit to raise and I’m hoping you can throw some light on it.”



“When a person leaves his or her spouse, it is usual to go elsewhere; or when a man leaves his heart in San Francisco, the heart will be moved to San Francisco while the chap stays wherever he came from before going there.”

“Agreed,” I said. “But leaving the EU is different.”

“Did you know,” he said, “that the EU is now twice the area of Greenland, which left the European Economic Community in 1985.

That means there’s space for half the EU in Greenland. Or we could leave all the EU in the Pacific Ocean centred on Point Nemo, which is know as the Pole of Inaccessibility, as it is further from land than any other point on Earth, being 1,670 miles from the nearest land.”

“So if we drew a circle around Point Nemo with a radius of 1,670 miles, it would contain no land,” I said.

Interestingly, 3,340 miles, which would be the diameter of the circle, is just 21 miles longer than the distance from Cape St Vincent in Portugal to the city of Perm in Russia, which is the longest land journey one can make in mainland Europe.

So we could definitely fit the EU into the circle around Point Nemo as Russia isn’t even in the EU.” “In which case,” said the polar bear, “we should revert to the previous plan and leave half the EU in Greenland.

June 21 is Greenland’s National Day, after all. I used to swim in the sea around Greenland, you know. It was very chilly and moving 370 million people there might warm the waters.”

I thanked the bear for his input and returned to my kedgeree.

