REVEALED: The £44 MILLION EU museum vanity project YOU are paying for

2016-06-22

GETTY • EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT

The final touches are being made to the “waste of money” House of European History, due to open in Brussels in November.

The egotistic project has six floors of self-congratulatory championing, explaining the history of European integration, while several member states grapple with chronic unemployment and saving the Eurozone from imploding. 

A spokeswoman for the European Parliament told Express.co.uk the EU museum is being funded by the European Parliament, which receives funding from all 28 member states.

The extravagant project launched in 2011 follows a £22m 'Parlamentarium' in Brussels which explains how the EU was developed. 

Building work includes renovating façades and extending in the lavish courtyard and roof. 

The pricey project is being headed by architects from France, Germany and Belgium. 

The Nobel Peace Prize medal awarded to the EU in 2012 for its contribution to "the advancement of peace and reconciliation" after two world wars will be the centrepiece of the museum in a renovated art deco building.

EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT 

 Disgraceful vanity project

Mike Hookem

The museum will also contain a number of exhibitions dealing with both world wars and the communist Iron Curtain that followed in Eastern Europe. 

Information in the EU museum is being translated into the European club's 24 official languages. 

If Vote Leave gets its way tomorrow, another room dedicated to Brexit will almost certainly have to be created.

The multimillion building will also house a cafe, gift shop and other events and cultural programmes at the expense of European taxpayers.

GETTY

The attraction in the heart of the European quarter of the Belgian capital says it "will give visitors the opportunity to learn about European history and to engage in critical reflection about its meaning for the present day". 

Its creators said the museum "would enable Europeans of all generations to be in a place where the European idea comes alive". 

MEP and former president of the European Parliament Hans-Gert Pottering, who envisaged the extravagant project said at its unveiling: "We have many national museums - in London, Berlin and other places, where the national history is shown. 

"But there is nothing which shows the history which Europeans share together, and somebody has to start one.

"I believe the museum is a contribution to peace - and peace is something which cannot be paid with money."



The costly plan was "unanimously backed" by the European Parliament's bureau which is currently made up of 20 members, including a President, vice-presidents and EU officials - with just one UK representative in contrast to three Germans, three Poles, two Italians and two from France.

But Ukip MEP Mike Hookem said: "We have fisherman trying to scrape together a living, who I joined on the flotilla in Hull again yesterday, who will be horrified - as I am - at this disgraceful vanity project. 

"We have veterans living on the streets, elderly people unable to be discharged from hospital because there is not sufficient care in the community, and their taxes are being spent on this house of horrors. 

"Anyone still wondering how to vote tomorrow need only look at projects like this and realise we are better off out."

Head of the European Parliament Martin Schulz spearheading the project said: "The establishment by the European Parliament of a House of European History in Brussels constitutes a significant innovation in the way in which an advanced democratic system approaches its relationship with the past.

"I am convinced that the House of European History will engage visitors in critical reflection on what the European integration process means for our common present and for our future together.

GETTY

"The House of European History will provide a space necessary for debate, knowledge and exchange of views regarding the history of Europe, its people and its institutions. We are building our European project on solid common roots, but our political union is all about the future."

Labour MEP Glenis Willmott has previously blasted the project as a waste of money, saying: "I think it's a ridiculous way to spend money. We should be focusing our energy on getting the economy moving."

