‘Believe in BRITAIN’ Boris Johnson launches final Brexit push on eve of EU referendum

2016-06-22

PA

The Vote Leave standard-bearer began a frenetic day of campaigning by appearing on BBC Breakfast via a video link from Maldon in Essex.

He said if the UK voted for a Brexit, changes could begin immediately.

He said: “We can begin the process of extracting ourselves from the burden-some and anti-democratic system of government. 

“Take back control of our borders so the European court can no longer decide to have people we want to deport on our streets.”

He added Britain could use the dividend from leaving the EU to hugely benefit the country.

He said: “That’s £10.5billion net that’s going to come back to this country every year that could be spent on our priorities such as the NHS.”

Mr Johnson also said he would advocate reducing immigration by introducing an Australian points-style for people wishing to live in the UK.

He said immigration was running at 333,000 a year, with 184,000 of those people coming from the EU alone. 

He said: “And 77,000 are coming without a job offer at all, which is way too high.

“That’s the equivalent to a city the size of Oxford which puts a massive strain on resources.

“Why on earth are people able to circulate around this great area as if it was all one country.

“I think we need to have a bit of common sense back to this system.”

He said urged people to vote leave and said: “This is our chance to believe in ourselves and take back control of our taxes, the ability to set our taxes, democracy and immigration. It will be independence day for this country.”

PA

PA

Mr Johnson’s day began with a dawn visit to meet market workers in London.

On a tour of Billingsgate Fish Market, the senior Tory urged voters to "believe in our country" and leave the European Union.

He said: "Obviously we are coming to the final 24 hours. This is a crucial time, lots of people will be making up their minds, and I hope very much they will believe in our country, believe in what we can do.

"It's time to have a totally new relationship with our friends and partners across the Channel.



BBC

"It's time to speak up for democracy, and hundreds of millions of people around Europe agree with us.

"It's time to break away from the failing and dysfunctional EU system."

He rejected the economic forecasts suggesting the country would face a downturn following Brexit.



Mr Johnson highlighted Remain camp chief Lord Rose's suggestion that wages for the low-paid could rise in the event of Brexit.

He said: "What you have seen over the last few years is a huge gulf opening up and widening between the incomes of FTSE 100 chieftains and people on the shop floor on low incomes who have basically seen either a pay freeze or in real terms their wages come down.”

