Michael Gove urges voters to 'free the country from a sinking ship'

2016-06-21

The Tory MP and key Brexit campaigner was speaking to the Today show on BBC Radio 4, and urged British voters to "free" the country from a sinking ship.

Mr Gove, who split with his close personal friend the prime minister over the EU referendum, said leaving the EU would send Europe in a better, more progressive direction.

On the issue of immigration, Mr Gove said: "It’s not until we leave the European Union that we can have full control over the number of people that come here.

"The only people I want to send home are those who are criminals or terrorist whose presence here is not conducive to the public good. 

"The people I want to stop coming here are criminals and people who might be coming here to use public services without contributing to our economy. 

GETTY

 The economic model that the European Union embodies is a job-destroying misery-inducing, unemployment-creating tragedy

Michael Gove

“If we vote to leave the European Union, we can have a national debate about what the appropriate figure is.

"The economic model that the European Union embodies is a job-destroying misery-inducing, unemployment-creating tragedy.

"If we vote to Leave what we can do is not just free ourselves from a sinking ship, we can also send Europe in a better and more progressive direction."

Earlier former deputy prime minister and Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg described the Leave's campaign's vow to lower immigration as the "biggest con of all".

The Remain campaigner said: "Of all the fibs and nonsense I’ve heard during this referendum campaign to hear Leave campaigners trying to be holier-than-thou about immigration targets when they themselves are now committing the biggest con of all telling millions of voters across the country that if we leave the European Union they will dramatically cut immigration when they have no plan to do so whatsoever. 

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

'What is really such a disservice to people who are struggling to make up their minds between now and Thursday is those who might be seduced into following what Michael Gove and Nigel Farage and Borris Johnson say about immigration will find themselves sorely let down. 

'I think they’ll feel very angry when they actually discover that the Leave campaigners have no plan at all to bring immigration down in any meaningful way, if we were to leave the EU. It’s the biggest con of all.

"They can not even agree amongst themselves whether they would implement a new land border in Ireland or not. If you don’t do that then of course you just leave the backdoor open having locked the front door.

"What’s the point of claiming you’re going to control borders when we’re not going to do so.

"What we should not do, it angers me actually, is the false prospectus that the Leave campaigners are giving to people that somehow if you leave the European Union immigration will disappear like the morning mist melting in the morning sun.

"It won’t. It is a fact of life we need to deal with whether we’re in the European Union or not."

