EXCLUSIVE: There is so much at stake for Britain THIS week, says DAVID CAMERON

2016-06-20

REUTERS

The murder of Jo Cox is one of them. Jo dedicated her life to the service of others, whether as an aid worker in war-torn countries or an MP in her beloved Yorkshire. 

She represented the best of Britain – a Britain that’s caring, compassionate and tolerant. In Parliament and in her community, she will be missed dreadfully. But, above all, she will be missed at home, by the children and husband she loved so deeply. 

At times like this, it’s very difficult to turn back to talking about the everyday business of politics. But on Thursday we face something that is not an everyday decision, but one which will affect our lives for decades to come: whether to remain in the European Union, or to quit – for good. So much is at stake here. 

Our economy is at stake and the jobs, low prices, public services and future opportunities that rely on that. Our place in the world is at stake and our ability to tackle the biggest threats of our age. But there’s something more at stake, too: the sort of country we are – whether we are a proud, outward-looking democracy, where we seek to work with others, not stand aside from them. 

Of course the EU isn’t perfect. I’m frustrated by it like you. But I believe we will have more opportunities, more security and we’ll live up to the finest traditions of our country if we remain in Europe rather than quitting. First, I believe we’ll have more opportunities and jobs. 

Because our great trading nation can sell easily to the single market of 500 million people – no Spanish customs official saying: “You’ve exceeded your quota”, no French minister saying: “That product is banned”. Everything in our lives is tied to the economic strength this gives us – the jobs we do, the prices we pay, the opportunities our children have, the value of our pensions. 

REUTERS

If we leave the EU, we leave the single market and we throw away that security. True, other countries like Norway have negotiated access. But they’ve had to accept double the number of EU migrants that we have. Even they are telling us: don’t do it. Nine out of 10 economists agree leaving would lead to recession, a decade of uncertainty and a poorer country in the long run. Common sense supports that. 

Abandon your biggest customer and you shrink your economy. The turbulence we’ve seen in global markets in recent days is a taste of life if we leave. Some say we’ll have more money to spend if we leave. But a smaller economy actually means less money to spend on things like the NHS and pensions. 

In fact, it could wipe thousands off private pensions and make state pensions worth £140 less a year because of rising inflation. And I understand the concerns about immigration. But there’s a right way and a wrong way of controlling it. The right way is by doing things like ending “something for nothing” – making sure people have to leave Britain if they don’t find a job after six months and that they have to pay into the welfare system for four years before they get full access. 

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

The wrong way would be to just quit and wreck our economy. Second, I believe we’ll be safer, because we can work with our neighbours more effectively. With the European Arrest Warrant, we’ve kicked out and brought to justice thousands of criminals and terror suspects. Those who want to leave act like it’s a silver bullet for all our problems. 

But leaving the EU wouldn’t stop the boats on the Med or the chaos at Calais – it would just make it more difficult for us to deal with. Third, I believe we’ll be stronger and a force for good in the world. We’re an outward-looking country. The great things we’ve done have involved building alliances with those who share our values, not by building barriers and sowing division. We’re not diminished by being in Europe, we’re stronger because we have a seat at our continent’s top table. 

It’s there that we make a difference in the world, from putting sanctions on Russia to protecting British workers. Those who want to leave say we’d gain more control. The opposite is true. Walk away, and we lose our say – and we’ll never get it back. Going to the polls on Thursday is the ultimate display of our democracy – settling a big question about our country at the ballot box. 

MEN SYNDICATION

Democracy is what Jo Cox stood for, giving people direct access to the person who represented their interests in Parliament. She was proud to do that and, tragically, it’s what she died doing. With the right to a democratic vote comes responsibility – responsibility to our children and grandchildren, who will live with the consequences. 

So think very carefully before you vote. Ask yourself: where will my family be financially better off; where will my community be safer; where will my country be a bigger force for good? And all the while, remember this: the decision is irreversible. 

There will be no re-run. We’ll be out of the EU for good. If you’re at all unsure, don’t take the risk of leaving. If you don’t know, don’t go. Instead, vote for the strength, security and prosperity of this great democracy – and vote to remain.

