New migration woe: Now HUNDREDS of Brazilians 'fraudulently obtaining EU passports'

2016-06-22

GETTY

Gangs charge around £10,000 for falsified papers which supposedly prove Brazilians’ links to countries such as Portugal and Italy.

Corrupt officials in isolated rural areas could reportedly also be facilitating the passport fraud – which, if successful, could allow the migrants the right to live and work in Britain as EU citizens.

The criminals exploit historic links between Brazil and EU member states such as Portugal and Italy in order to falsify family histories that would make their customers eligible citizenship in those nations.

Birth certificates belonging to families descended from European migrants are faked – or male EU citizens who have settled in Brazil are paid to add their names to bogus documentation for people born to single mothers.

Police have admitted the worrying ruse is thriving in some areas of the country – and say their job is made more difficult as it is hard to check the validity of documents produced in "rural areas".

GETTY

Portuguese immigration officer Inspector Marco de Carmo told The Times: “We are investigating hundreds of cases.

“It is far harder for the Portuguese authorities to check the documents which are presented from remote areas of Brazil than if the application is made by someone who is in Portugal.

“However, we have been able to reject fake applications.”

GETTY

The paper also revealed that two thirds of administrative officers dealing with passport applications in the Brazilian state of Minas Gerais lacked proper legal training.

Twelve people suspected of taking part in the scam were recently arrested in the remote province.

Last year it was revealed that thousands of migrants from the former Soviet state of Moldova – where the average wage is just £60 a week – were legally exploiting a similar so-called “granny loophole” in order to obtain EU passports.

Though Moldova is not in the EU, close ties with neighbouring Romania mean hundreds of thousands can easily obtain the right to live and work within the 28-nation bloc.

