EU president calls for UNITY in crumbling bloc as Euroscepticism sweeps following Brexit

2016-06-24

EPA 

In a speech after Brexit was announced, Mr Tusk described it as a “historic moment” but “not a moment for hysterical reactions”. 

The president said he was determined to keep the EU together. 

He said Brussels were prepared for a "dramatic scenario," adding: "We are determined to keep our unity as 27". 

Eurosceptism is sweeping across the continent after the UK voted to untangle itself from the crumbling bloc. 

GETTY 

 We are determined to keep our unity as 27

Donald Tusk

Mr Tusk offered EU leaders an informal meeting at next Tuesday's European summit in Brussels to discuss "the details of further proceedings".

He added: "All the procedures for the withdrawal of the UK from the EU are clear and set out in the Treaties. In order to discuss the details of further proceedings, I have offered the leaders an informal meeting of the twenty seven in the margins of the European Council summit.

"And I will also propose to the leaders that we start a wider reflection on the future of our Union.

"Finally, it's true that the past years have been the most difficult ones in the history of our Union. But I always remember what my father used to tell me: What doesn't kill you, makes you stronger."

His intervention comes after Dutch anti-immigration leader Geert Wilders called for a referendum on the Netherlands membership of the EU following the British exodus. 

Wilders, who is leading opinion polls, said he will call a referendum if he is elected as prime minister in the March general elections in the Netherlands. 

PH 

GETTY 

Meanwhile, far-right and National Front leader Marine Le Pen called for a Frexit after the Brexit vote was announced -  which saw the Leave campaign win more than 52 per cent of the votes.  

She tweeted: “Victory to liberty! As I have been demanding for many years, we now need the same referendum in France and EU countries.”

Just one day before Britons headed to the polls, Italy’s antiestablishment 5-star movement called for a referendum on whether to keep the Euro. 

It comes just moments before David Cameron announced his decision to resign as Prime Minister following the sensational result. 

Outside Number 10 he acknowledged "fresh leadership" was required in the wake of the EU referendum. 

