‘Benefits must be earned’ Denmark to make migrants PAY into system before they get welfare

2016-06-17

GETTY

Foreign minister Kristian Jensen said new migrants arriving in Denmark should not be able to claim financial support without contributing to the Scandinavian country’s economy first. 

The leading politician said: “I think it would be reasonable to have a contribution requirement before receiving social benefits. 

“I think it would create greater understanding for labour movement in Denmark.”

The renewed call for restrictions on European migrants comes after red-tape obsessed officials rejected Denmark’s first proposal for a benefits clamp down, claiming it would breach EU rules. 

However the Government has now vowed to implement a contribution requirement.

All working Danish citizens are expected to pay into an unemployment fund. 

GETTY

GETTY

 I think it would be reasonable to have a contribution requirement

Foreign minister Kristian Jensen

Mr Jensen said a concrete plan had not yet been drafted but he said the restrictions would apply to child support and well as the Danish version of Jobseeker’s Allowance. 

The foreign minister added: “If a Danish worker only can receive unemployment benefits after he’s earned the right through payment to a Danish unemployment insurance fund, the same should apply to people coming from other EU countries.”

The moves comes after it was revealed a Syrian migrant who arrived in Denmark with one wife and eight children had been allowed to bring another two wives and 12 more children to the country.

GETTY

As the migrant claims to be too sick to work and has 20 children it would see Danish taxpayers fork out 214,128 Danish Kroners (£21,883) in support for the family each year. 

Outraged officials demanded the Danish benefits system should be reviewed as it was suggested it was allowing people to exploit the establishment. 

At the time, Integration spokesperson for the Conservatives, Naser Khader, said it should not be possible for someone who does not intend to work to be given such vast sums and he called for Denmark to implement an upper limit for the number of children a person can claim contributions for.

