Brexit: Jeremy Corbyn warns the UK it has a ‘complicated set of years’ ahead

2016-06-24

Mr Corbyn appeared on ITV’s Good Morning Britain today to talk about the results of the historic referendum when he issued his warning.

He told hosts Susanna Reid and Piers Morgan: “We are in a for a complicated set of years,” before adding: “The possibly of the higher rates of unemployment.”

The Islington North MP went on to say that his focus is now going to be concentrating on protecting jobs and working conditions.

“The issues now are the protection of jobs and working conditions,” he explained.

ITV

Mr Corbyn went on to say: “We have some important decisions to face.

“The consequences have to be dealt with. The first thing is export-related jobs and the way in which those jobs can be protected if there is a fall in the value of the pound.”

He said that he and his party would be “absolutely opposing any austerity budget” and maintaining a “good relationship” with Europe in the future. Labour would also be focusing campaign for the funding to local government. 

ITV

ITV

ITV

 We are in a for a complicated set of years

Jeremy Corbyn

When asked about his decision to back the Remain camp and call on the electorate to vote to stay, Mr Corbyn described his campaign as one of “criticism”. 

He did not appear to be drawn when asked whether he should step down as the head of the Labour party after 5.1 per cent voted to leave the EU compared to 48.1 per who wanted to stay.

Instead, Mr Corbyn spoke about the Labour strongholds that voted in favour of remaining in the economic-political body.

Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), makes a statement after Britain voted to leave on the European Union

“London and Bristol voted overwhelming to Remain,” he said, adding: “Clearly there was resonance for that in some parts of the country.”  

Since the decision was announced this morning, Prime Minister David Cameron has announced his resignation and said that a new British leader would be put into place by the Conservative Party Conference in October. 

"I will do everything I can as Prime Minister to steady the ship over the coming weeks and months, but I don't think it would be right for me to try to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination,” he said. 

Good Morning Britain is on ITV on weekdays on 6am.

