Even 'depressed Eurocrat JUNCKER is LOSING FAITH in the EU ahead of British referendum'

2016-06-17

GETTY

 He is less and less positive about the EU and the abilities of the member states in particular.

Senior EU official

A stunning admission from one senior EU official has revealed that the Brussels fat cat’s mood has “darkened” amid concerns the continent could break-up if Britain votes to leave next week.

Under-fire Juncker is reportedly planning to make a desperate intervention in the Brexit debate, despite David Cameron’s pleading with him to stay away from the campaign.

But now the Brussels insider, whose revelations about the Commission president’s state of mind will not help the Remain campaign’s cause, has revealed migration is Juncker’s most pressing concern.

GETTY

They said: “He is less and less positive about the EU and the abilities of the member states in particular.

“You can say he is EU-depressed. He has decided simply to focus hard on a few things, especially migration and Greece. The rest doesn’t matter to him.”

This comes as other top Brussels brass have started to break ranks about the president’s absence from the day-to-day workings of the Commission.

Juncker, who is a former prime minister of Luxembourg, allegedly prefers to work from the country – rather than his Brussels offices.

One senior diplomat said: “The truth is we don’t see him. People don’t complain here because he is not indispensable to the everyday functioning of the EU. We sometimes don’t notice his absence.”

The veteran Eurocrat has also come in for heavy criticism from Tory MEP Geoffrey Van Orden, who has spoken of the president’s stubbornness to negotiate with those on the opposite side of large political issues.

GETTY

Van Orden said: “He only really wants to listen to people who agree with the Euro-federalist line and the rest he regards as mavericks and populists.”

Juncker has long been associated with the wing of the EU looking for ever-closer union between the 28 member states.

GETTY

In 2014, he said: “Citizens are losing faith. Extremists on the left and right are nipping at our heels.

“It is time we breathed a new lease on life into the European project.”

