Brexit prompts 'unprecedented increase' in adultery and chlamydia in City workers

2016-06-22

Getty

A leading private GP has revealed over the lead-up to the referendum tomorrow a record number of bankers, lawyers and those in finance have come to see him with anxiety concerns.

Dr Laurence Gerlis, founder of samedaydoctor walk-in clinics across London, Surrey and Manchester, said he has “never seen anything like it”.

A growing number of City workers have been coming to him saying they have cheated on their partners after drinking too much and are concerned they may have a sexually transmitted disease (STD).

The 66-year-old told Express.co.uk: “It’s been gradually building and over the past month, people are going drinking more as they fear for their jobs in the case of Brexit.

“Lots of people in the city are just waiting for the referendum tomorrow, with not much work to do, so they’re drinking more and this in turn is encouraging them to make bad decisions.

“About 70 per cent of people who come into the clinic concerned they have an STI after sleeping with somebody who isn’t their partner, don’t have an STI.

Express

“But, there’s definitely been an increase in chlamydia.”

He said a rise in anxiety has also been linked to the fear of Britain leaving the EU, with some simply concerned about their jobs, and many ensconced in guilt having drunk too much and cheated.

The doctor, who has worked in the NHS and private practice for more than 25 years, added: “If we leave on Friday, we’ll see more of this increase in drinking and the subsequent STIs because companies will be restructuring, could be laying off staff who may then turn to drinking.

“There’s a risk the pound will go up and go down so I’m really quite nervous for the effect this could have on people.

Getty

“If we stay in I think there will be a scene of relaxation and relief but that could also result in more drinking, but in more of a celebratory way so hopefully less regret.

“The feeling of fear in the City is palpable at the moment.”

In April, Express.co.uk warned stress levels could reach an all-time high during the referendum build-up.

Dr Tereza Caplets, a senior lecturer in political psychology at the Institute for Conflict, Cooperation and Security at Birmingham University, said: “Citizens are not asked to simply evaluate a policy, they are asked to evaluate a projected future, and this decision breeds fear because it entails a high level of uncertainty.

Getty

A Royal Wedding, The Wombles and a new James Bond

“The heightened uncertainty and the fear of the unknown has pragmatic implications. 

“British citizens living abroad will be affected, citizens for EU countries will be affected, companies doing business outside UK borders will be affected, and these are fears about people’s livelihoods that cannot be ignored.

“The fear of having to make a decision about how we feel as a nation about the EU, and the fear of being responsible for the implications of that decision, which will be real and significant. 

“I think the phrase ‘jumping from the frying pan into the fire’ is a pretty good one in this case.”

