Michael Howard: There are three facts about the referendum – all the rest is guesswork

2016-06-16

Lord Howard, a former Conservative Party leader, blasted the Remain team for their "scaremongering" during the campaign.

He told Nick Ferrari on LBC there had been a lot of "guesswork in the campaign" but not many facts.

Lord Howard said: "There are three facts.

"Number one: If we leave the European Union, we won’t have to pay billions of pounds a year into their coffers.

GETTY

 We will be an independent self-governing country again

Lord Howard

"Number two: If we leave, we can control immigration into this country.

"Number three: If we leave, our parliament and our courts will no longer be subordinate to the European Court of Justice.

"We will be an independent self-governing country again.

"Pretty well everything else is guesswork.”

Lord Howard was then challenged that leaving the EU will only help control people entering the UK from the European Union, not the rest of the world.

Ferrari told him less than 200,000 people from EU countries out of the most recent net migration figure of 333,000, and questioned his knowledge of the figures.

"No, no, no," Lord Howard replied. "It’s much more than that. That is the one area where we have no control at all."

"The only area of immigration which we have absolutely no control are people coming into this country from the European Union.

GETTY

"Where they come in from other parts of the world, we do have control."

He also described George Osborne’s post-Brexit budget warning as a "mistake" but refused to directly answer whether the Chancellor was no longer fit for purpose.

He said: "It is fairly obvious from the response he has got from both the Conservative Party and the opposition he would not be able to get it through."

"So I am afraid it was another example of scaremongering and it was a mistake.

"He has been a very good Chancellor… I still admire him and still think he is a very good Chancellor but I disagree with him on this issue."

