'EU was a noble dream turned into a nightmare' Labour MP's stirring Leave speech

2016-06-22

Gisela Stuart said the EU had been a "noble dream" which had now become a "nightmare".

Her remarks opened Thursday's EU debate which saw Ms Stuart team up with fellow Brexiteers Boris Johnson and Andrea Leadsom to make the case for Leave.

Opposing them were London mayor Sadiq Khan, Scottish Conservative leader Ruth Davidson and head of the TUC Frances O'Grady, all for Remain.

The MP for Birmingham Edgbaston asked the packed-out audience of 6,000 in Wembley Arena to consider one question before marking the box in the polling booth.



BBC

She asked: "If we were not in the EU today, would we join it?

"If you think not, then vote leave to take control."

She said: "The EU was a noble dream in the last century but today it has failed. it was turned into a nightmare.

"The only continent with a lower growth rate than Europe is Antarctica."



BBC

 The only continent with a lower growth rate than Europe is Antarctica

Gisela Stuart

Ms Stuart continued: "It doesn’t have to be like this!

"We can take back control over our laws, taxes, immigration policy and security. 

The Labour politician, who moved to Britain from Germany in 1974, hit out at those who dismiss controlling immigration as hateful.

She unashamedly said: "I am an immigrant. But we need to plan for our public services, for our schools and hospitals."

She blamed the "50,000 missing primary school places in West Midlands" on uncontrolled immigration. 

The passionate debate also saw Boris Johnson call on Britain to declare their own independence day when they go to the polls on Thursday.

BBC

Following the debate, Pro-Remain Apprentice boss Lord Sugar sparked controversy when he said Ms Stuart should not "tell us British what we should do" because she is originally from Germany.

The businessman tweeted: "I find it strange that Gisela Gschaider a 1974 immigrant from Germany is on the Brexit panel telling us British what we should do."

Supporters on both sides of the debate came out to attack Lord Sugar for his remarks.

Tory MP and Leave backer Nadhim Zahawi said: "You must withdraw and apologise to Gisela. That is disgraceful. She is as British as you are."

Former Tory MP Louise Mensch simply called the Remain backer "a pig".

Others on Twitter labelled the remark as "racist" and "nonsense".

