Shameless bankers 'gamble with Britain's economy' in bid to make money from EU referendum

2016-06-24

GETTY

Hegefunds commissioned expensive private exit polls in a bid to predict the outcome of the referendum before a result is officially announced.

Now traders have embarked upon an all-night feeding frenzy, placing huge bets on foreign currencies in an attempt to clean up before stock exchanges open again tomorrow.



 There is something very parasitical about trying to gamble on the back of the fate of the nation

Chris Leslie

Furious MPs believe the public will be angered by the bankers’ money-grabbing attitude, especially after much of the electorate queued in the driving rain to place their vote yesterday.

Chris Leslie, Labour's former shadow chancellor, said: “There is something very parasitical about trying to gamble on the back of the fate of the nation. While I am not surprised the City is watching this vote closely, it does leave you with a slightly bitter taste.

“My main concern is that markets are stable and ordinary people's savings and pensions are not put on the line in some grand gamble.”

GETTy

John Mann, a Labour member of the Commons Treasury committee, said: “Here we go again. This shows the difference between all of us and the false world these City traders and bankers live in – gambling with other people's money.

“Bankers have hit the living standards and jobs of people across the country. They set an appalling example to everyone. It can't get any lower than this. The country will come together and unite in anger.”

Exit polls have not been conducted by broadcasters, unlike at the General Election, amid fears they would not be accurate enough.

GETTY

This means bans have conducted their own polling and could gain crucial trading information as a result.

Foreign currency dealers will have been able to exploit their advantage through the night because their markets stay open 24 hours and greedy bankers can hardly contain their excitement.

One said: “The referendum is an incredible opportunity to make money” while one stockbroker called for “Champagne breakfasts all round”.

GETTY

While the London Stock Exchange was closed, traders could prepare to bet on shares going down when it reopened tomorrow – the practice known as short-selling.

Barclays said around £95billion is waiting to be invested by clients.

