English revolt: What happens now England voted for Brexit but other British nations didn't

2016-06-22

Getty

EU chiefs fear that a Brexit vote could tear Europe apart. But it could also lead to deep divisions closer to home, perhaps prompting the break-up of the UK.  

Here is a look at what could happen after English voters swung the EU referendum result towards Brexit on polling day. 

In many ways, the Brexit campaign has been an English revolt mainly backed by Eurosceptics who live in England. 

The St George’s Cross flag is flying across the country in support of Brexit, while anti-EU party Ukip has fanned the flames of English nationalism. 

A revealing map of the electorate, created by YouGov, showed that the top ten most Eurosceptic areas of Britain were all found in England. 



YouGov

There was anti-EU feeling across huge swathes of England, but much higher levels of support for the EU in Scotland, Wales and London. 

The map revealed that the most pro-EU area of Britain was Ceredigion in Wales while Scotland was by far the most pro-EU country in the UK.

Over in Northern Ireland, a recent poll showed that a majority of Protestants favour Brexit but Catholics overwhelmingly want to stay in. 

The Ipsos Mori poll, for the Belfast Telegraph, found 37% of voters want to remain, 26% want to leave and 37% remain undecided.  

If England drags Scotland and Northern Ireland out the EU against their will, the UK is likely to become deeply divided and fragmented. 

Friends of Europe associate fellow Kirsty Hughes said: “Unless all four parts of the UK vote in favour of staying in the EU, the result is likely to be highly politically divisive. 

“Serious political and constitutional crises would be likely to result.” 

In a policy paper, she warned that an “unwelcome Brexit” would spark debates over the devolved administrations of Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales.  

She said: “The UK will be politically fractured across all its parts, and potentially debates about Irish unity will return as well.”

The SNP has already raised the spectre of another referendum over Scottish independence after Britain voted to leave the EU on Thursday.  

Both Nicola Sturgeon and Alex Salmond have predicted an overwhelming demand for another referendum if England drags Scotland out of the EU. 

Mr Salmond says: “Should Brexit succeed, Cameron would embark on a two-year negotiated exit, creating a time frame for a new referendum on Scottish independence.”  

A Brexit vote has spark calls for a poll on a united Ireland Northern Ireland in order to give Northern Irish voters the choice between belonging to the UK or EU.  





In the end Leave won the campaign in Wales in a surprise result for the mainly Labour country. 

Before the referendum Welsh First Minister Carwyn Jones has attacked the “flag-waving nationalism” of some elements of the Brexit campaign. 

“If Wales votes to remain in the UK but the UK votes to leave, there will be a crisis. There will be a constitutional crisis.

“The UK cannot possibly continue in its present form if England votes to leave and everyone else votes to stay,” Mr Jones told the Independent.  

Professor Tony Travers, of the London School of Economics, has said broadly pro-EU Londoners could also push for more independence in the event of Brexit. 

"If we vote to leave the EU it will be an event, in the scale of things, a bit like executing Charles I,” he told the BBC.  

“It would be something so profound to the British understanding of themselves and their capacity to understand how they want to govern themselves.

"It will be an incredible moment in the country's history and at such a moment, why should we only do one thing?"



