Brexit: What will happen to immigration when Britain leaves the EU?

2016-06-24

EPA 

The Conservative cabinet minister Chris Grayling believes that Brexit will allow Britain to develop a “much more managed” immigration system and to create plans for how many EU citizens come to live and work here. 

Mr Grayling told Express.co.uk: “It would allow the Government to manage flows of people coming into the UK better. It’s not closing the doors, it’s making sure the flow through the doors is well managed.” 



The leader of the House of Commons said that post-Brexit Britain could select migrants to fill skills shortages while excluding Europeans who have not found employment here yet. 

Vote Leave supporters have proposed an Australian-style points system based what skill are needed here, plus restrictions to stop migrants coming over unless they have secured a job. 

EPA

Mr Grayling believes the UK could introduce elements of both policies, adding: “It’s about taking back control and taking whatever decision is best for the country.” 

HOW DOES AUSTRALIA’S SYSTEM WORK?

Asked whether the anti-immigration rhetoric could divide communities, he said that concerns over immigration were already being felt right across society. 

Mr Grayling said: “This is a legitimate part of the discussion in the same way as the economic impact.” 

He added: “It’s not about race, colour and creed. It’s about the number of houses we’ve got, the availability of school places and the capability of the NHS to absorb extra people.”

The former Justice Secretary also rejected former Prime Minister John Mayor’s claims that Eurosceptic Tories risked “morphing” into Ukip, which has long campaigned on the issue of immigration.   

Mr Grayling, who shared a platform with Ukip leader Nigel Farage at a Brexit rally in April, said: “I don’t think most of the country thinks that.” 

Prime Minister David Cameron had stressed the importance ensuring that new arrivals from Europe “make a contribution” for four years before getting full welfare access. 



This cornerstone of his EU deal, dubbed the emergency brake, would have remained in force for a period of seven years if there was intense pressure on public services. 

Mr Grayling said the welfare changes might have made a “bit of a difference”, but Britain has no ability to control immigration numbers as long as it remained in the EU. 

WHAT WAS IN CAMERON’S DEAL?  



Reasons to remain or leave the EU

Last month it was revealed that net migration to the UK now stands at 333,000, the second highest figure on record. 

Mr Cameron was challenged over his election pledge to cut migration to under 100,000 during a TV debate on Sky News on Thursday June 2.  

On Friday June 3 Home Affairs Committee chairman MP Keith Vaz MP said: “It will a take a modern miracle for the government to meet its target."

Mr Farage described immigration as the "defining issue" of the EU referendum campaign and called for Britain to take control of its borders. 

He said: "The fact that we can only control our borders if we leave the European Union, that we can only ever get an Australian-style points system as an independent country outside of the EU is clearly an argument that has massive appeal out there across the country." 



