'The country is going backwards' Andrew Castle stunned by anti-immigrant caller

2016-06-20

During his Sunday morning show on LBC, Castle received a call from Jay, an Indian immigrant who claimed a rise in anti-social behaviour was due to foreigners moving to the UK and failing to assimilate with British culture.

Jay, from Greenford in west London, was discussing the upcoming EU referendum and said he was "not sure" if he even lived in England anymore.

He told Castle: "People should vote with their common sense… what they see on the streets and schools and hospitals.

"I am an immigrant, I came here some thirty years ago, and what I see is that the country is going backwards.

LBC•GETTY

 I just see foreigners, and not the indigenous people, all the time when I come out of the house

Jay from Greenford

"My street since and the High Street since has changed.

"So much so that I am not sure if I live in England as I saw it 25 years ago or another country.

"I just see foreigners, and not the indigenous people, all the time when I come out of the house."

Jay, who said he works for a large technology company, claimed during his shocking tirade he felt his area was not as nice as it used to be because of the number of immigrants now living there.

"Yes," Jay agreed. "When I go into the work environment I see completely different atmosphere of people.

"And when I come out of where I live it is just totally different."

Jay then said he has witnessed a rise in anti-social behaviour in Greenford.

Asked to explain why he felt it was down to immigration, he continued: "It is just… that if you have too many people coming in they are just bringing their cultures and they are just forgetting how the traditional culture evolved over centuries."

GETTY

Jay’s call left Castle shocked and provoked a mixed reaction on social media.

"Most people I talk to from earlier waves of immigration are of the same opinion," wrote one user.

"UK is simply getting too crowded."

Another tweeted: "All should be welcome as long as they work and integrate."

