Michael Gove insists George Osborne HAS been making plans for Brexit

2016-06-21

PA • GETTY

With just two days until Britain’s historic vote on EU membership, the Justice Secretary rubbished suggestions the Government has neglected to consider the possibility of a Leave result on Thursday.

Yesterday, the Chancellor had stressed in the long-term there was “no plan” for the UK leaving the EU and claimed there would be no answer for “years and years” to come.

But Mr Gove, who sits in the Cabinet with Mr Osborne, said the Chancellor’s department will have been devising a strategy for the UK to successfully walk away from the 28-country bloc.

The leading Brexit campaigner told LBC Radio: “One of the things about this campaign is people on the Remain side have to maintain right up until the vote a particular stance and I don't criticise them for it.

“The French politicians will say if you vote to leave then these terrible things will happen and people in the Treasury have to maintain with iron certainty that we're definitely going to vote to remain and they mustn't allow for any alternative possibility to be entertained.

“But inside the Treasury and indeed in the French foreign office they're preparing for a Leave vote and preparing to ensure that it works in the most stable way in all our interests.

“But it's one of those things you can't admit.”

 Inside the Treasury and indeed in the French foreign office they're preparing for a Leave vote

Michael Gove

Mr Gove, the Lord Chancellor, also responded to suggestions the Prime Minister may have breached strict rules over the EU referendum by making a direct appeal to voters outside Downing Street this afternoon.

Official guidance issued before the ‘purdah’ period for the referendum was enforced on May 27 states Government property should not be used for campaigning.

But Mr Gove said he was relaxed about David Cameron’s appearance outside Number 10 to make a last-ditch plea to voters to snub Brexit.

He said: “I'm no expert on the rules of what's called purdah which govern what you can and can't do in the run-up to an election or a referendum vote.

“To be honest while there may well be questions to be asked, I'm chilled about it.

“I think the Prime Minister has got a right to make the arguments that he wants to make so I'm sure that some of the people who are experts in these rules will know if any sort of line has been crossed but I won't complain.”



Mr Cameron today asked older generations, who are more likely to back Leave, to “think about the hopes and dreams of your children and grandchildren” before deciding how to vote.

Mr Gove, a co-chair of the Vote Leave campaign, revealed he had indeed asked both his children about the referendum with both of them supporting Brexit.

He said: “I've talked about this referendum with my children and they believe that we would be better off outside the EU.

“My daughter was for Leave right from the beginning, my son was initially for Remain as he was worried about the impact on the Premier League and in particular on Chelsea.

“He supports Chelsea, I don't, so that's one other area of difference in the Gove family.

“He has, as I think lots of young people have, he's only 11, but he's watched some of the debates, he's listened to some of the arguments and he's come round to the view the EU doesn't seem to be working for young people elsewhere.

“As I say he's only 11 so I'm not trying to suggest he's a John Maynard Keynes of the future but he has been struck by the fact in Greece youth unemployment is so high.

“The EU doesn't seem to be working for young people elsewhere.”

