Donald Trump praises ‘great’ Brexit as he arrives in Scotland to open new golf resort

2016-06-24

GETTY/ WENN

As dozens of protestors - including a mariachi band sponsored by a bookmakers - attempted to disrupt proceedings, the billionaire spoke of how Britons had "taken back their country." 

Trump Turnberry in south Ayrshire is the tycoon's second course in Scotland and the facelift has transformed the links resort. 

Shaking hands with hotel workers, Mr Trump, asked about the referendum result, which was only formally confirmed a short time before he arrived, said: "I think it's a great thing that's happened. It's an amazing vote, very historic. 

"People are angry all over the world. They're angry over borders, they're angry over people coming into the country and taking over and nobody even knows who they are." 

Amid high security, including his own personal US Secret Service detail, he continued: "They're angry about many, many things in the UK, the US and many other places. This will not be the last. 

"I said this was going to happen and I think it is a great thing. Basically, they took back their country. That's a great thing. I think we're doing very well in the United States also, and it is essentially the same thing that is happening in the United States. 

"I want to support my son who really represented me here in building this great great place (Turnberry)." 

Asked about the impact that Brexit may have on the UK economy, Mr Trump said: "If the pound goes down, we're going to do more business. If the pound goes down, more people are coming to Turnberry, frankly. 

Brexit: What to expect next

 I think it's a great thing that's happened

Donald Trump

"The pound has gone down and we will see what the impact of that is. But I think places like Scotland, England and different places in Great Britain, I think you're going to see a lot of activity." 

He continued: "The pound got high and people weren't able to do what they wanted to do, for travelling and other things. I think it could very well turn out to be a positive. 

"Nobody really knows. You'll know in about five years, you'll be able to analyse it. Maybe, it will take even longer than that, but what is known is that they've taken back their independence, and that's a very important thing." 

Meanwhile, campaign groups were banned from flying a banner over the course after a 'no-fly zone' was imposed in the area. 

WENN

The stunt, proposed by 38 Degrees, a political activism organisation, had arranged for a "Love Trumps Hate" banner to pass over the luxury resort. 

However, they were told yesterday morning about the ban by air traffic control. 

Organisers have condemned the decision, describing it as a "heavy handed" attempt to restrict freedom of speech.

Spokesman, Stewart Kirkpatrick, said: "We're disappointed that Donald Trump won't see our members' positive message. There is nothing threatening or offensive about it. 

WENN

WENN

"'Love trumps hate' is a simple statement to Donald Trump - and others - that hate and intolerance have no place in our country. It is a symbolic gesture but also a rallying cry to people across the UK to continue to work for peace and democracy." 

He added: "Our plan for a plane has made headlines round the world so our message has got through. And we'll still fly the plane - so, our message will be seen today - but this seems like a heavy-handed decision to restrict freedom of speech and crack down on legitimate protest." 

The request for a no-fly zone was made by Police Scotland and implemented by the Civil Aviation Authority. 

The arrival of the mariachi band was a stunt arranged by Paddy Power reflecting Mr Trump's recent adverse comments about Mexicans and his perceived view of them as criminals. 

