'It allows for explosive growth' Industrialist backs UK breaking away from 'cumbersome' EU

2016-06-16

Speaking on BBC Radio 4, the industrialist said firms in the EU were hampered by too much "cumbersome" regulation.

Mr Klesch, who runs his own investment fund, specialises in turning round struggling companies.

In recent years, the wealthy entrepreneur has bought steel mills and refineries in Germany and Holland.  

YOUTUBE•GETTY

His intervention came as the Financial Times labelled the decision to leave the EU as "a gratuitous act of self-harm".

In its editorial it said: "A vote to withdraw would be irrevocable, a grievous blow to the post-1945 liberal world order."

The paper’s editor Lionel Barber told Today said: "There will be a political crisis in this country if we vote no. There will be a shock to the economy.

"I think people are underestimating the severity of the shock. It is important to remember who favours us leaving… Marine Le Pen, Donald Trump."

"Vladimir Putin may not have said it publicly but certainly The Kremlin would be interested and is interested in weaker, less coherent western Europe."

GETTY

Disagreeing with the Financial Time’s stance, Mr Klesch said that international investors would find the UK more attractive if it left the EU.

He said: "The model is a very static model, a very heavily regulated model. In that static environment it's hard to make amendments. It’s hard to reverse yourself if a business is in trouble. Britain is a part of that now. 

"The future of Brexit allows Britain to get away from that static, onerous module and it can go to a dynamic model. A module that’s focused on growth and relieves businesses of regulation.”

"The big advantage is that once you move into a dynamic environment it allows for explosive growth."

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

Mr Klesch agreed that there would be an economic shock were the UK to leave, stating there was "no such thing as a risk-free transaction".

He said: "People are afraid of change. There will be short-term pain, but long-term gain."

The business mogul believes the UK should be confident of its position and status in the world economy – and criticised Barack Obama's intervention in the referendum.

"I'm offended by the President of the United States coming over here and saying we will have to go to the back of the queue," he continued. "When [the UK has] the fifth-largest economy in the world. Has he talked to Ford? Has he talked to Apple?"

The UK votes on whether to leave the European Union on June 23.

