Labour MP’s anger as Jo Cox murder used for political capital in EU referendum debate

2016-06-17

PA / GETTY

But the appeals of Leeds West MP Rachel Reeves seemed to fall on deaf ears yesterday as senior figures in Europe, the Remain campaign and pro-EU sections of the British media tried to capitalise on the appalling events. 

Ms Reeves was in tears as she attended a vigil to her friend and fellow Yorkshire MP in the parish church at Birstall where the murder took place. 

And she appealed for her fellow Remain campaigners to not link the death to the EU referendum debate. 

She said: “There’s of course going to be a lively debate around fundamental questions like our membership of the EU.



 I don’t think we should link the referendum to Jo’s death

Rachel Reeves

“But, I don’t think that’s linked to what happened yesterday. 

“We don’t know what the motives were of the guy who attacked her yesterday.

“I don’t think we should link the referendum to Jo’s death.” 



Mourning for the murdered MP had hardly begun before senior supporters of the Remain campaign tried to use the incident to persuade voters to reject Brexit in next week’s referendum. 

German Chancellor Angela Merkel blamed the referendum debate for Mrs Cox’s death. 

She said: “The exaggerations and radicalisation of part of the language do not help to foster an atmosphere of respect.” 

PA

LNP

In a shameless tweet, European Commissioner Dimitris Avramopoulos, said: “Jo Cox murdered for her dedication to European democracy and humanity. Extremism divides and nourishes hatred.” 

Condemnations of the “politicisation” of Mrs Cox’s death by Remain campaigners were led by former Tory MP Louise Mensch. 

The Brexit supporter discussed how as an MP she and her children regularly received death and rape threats. 

School children and teachers throw flowers on to the hearse carrying murdered Member of Parliament Jo Cox's as her funeral cortege will passes through Heckmondwike in northern Britain

She said: “The fact that Jo Cox was brutally killed and taken from her young, loving family is an assault on the nation.”

Former Labour leadership candidate Yvette Cooper tried to inject a note of calm. 

Asked if the EU referendum debate had become too nasty, Ms Cooper replied: “I think the thing about Jo is she would have always stood against that.” 

