Trump congratulates UK for Brexit - and says Obama's endorsement CAUSED Europe split

2016-06-24

The billionaire said "it is a great thing" because UK have "taken back their country" as he touched down at his Trump Turnberry golf resort in Scotland following Britain's decision to leave the European Union. 

He arrived in his "Trump" emblazoned helicopter at the Turnberry resort in South Ayrshire to officially open the revamped resort he bought in 2014, just an hour after Prime Minister David Cameron sensationally announced his decision to stand down in October. 

He gave a thumbs-up as he left his helicopter and shook hands with workers on his way to the hotel before making the comments about the historic EU referendum result

He said Obama had been "bold" by endorsing the EU - a mistake which led to this morning's result.

He said: "I was surprised that President Obama would be so bold to come here and tell people what to do.

"I think a lot of people don't like him and I think if he had not said it I think you're result might have been different."

He added: "He got involved, I don't know if that was through a friendship with David Cameron.

"It could have been. I understand friendship and I can understand why he did it, but I think it is something that he shouldn't have done.

"It's not his country, it's not his part of the world.

PA 

"He shouldn't have done it and I actually think his recommendation perhaps caused it to fail."

He continued: "I like David Cameron. He has had a couple of rough statements, but that's okay, I think David Cameron's a good man.

"He was wrong on this. He didn't get the mood of his country right. He was very surprised to see what happened.

"He probably did the right thing but we will see what happens."

REUTERS 

 People are angry all over the world. They're angry over borders, they're angry over people coming into the country

Donald Trump

Mr Trump said: "I think it's a great thing that's happened. It's an amazing vote, very historic.

"People are angry all over the world. They're angry over borders, they're angry over people coming into the country and taking over and nobody even knows who they are.

"They're angry about many, many things in the UK, the US and many other places.

"This will not be the last."

He said UK divisions "will heal" as "it is a great place" adding: "I said this was going to happen and I think it is a great thing.

John Di Domenico the world's busiest Donald Trump impersonator was so occupied doing his tribute act that he failed to go to the polls and vote for his lookalike.

AFP 

"Basically, they took back their country. That's a great thing.

"I think we're doing very well in the United States also, and it is essentially the same thing that is happening in the United States.

"I want to support my son who really represented me here in building this great great place (Turnberry)."

Trump also posted a statement on his Facebook page regarding the EU result.

Writing on Twitter, he added: "They have declared their independence from the European Union and have voted to reassert control over their own politics, borders and economy.

"A Trump administration pledges to strengthen our ties with a free and independent Britain, deepening our bonds in commerce, culture and mutual defense [sic].



AFP 

The US presidential hopeful was also heckled by a protester who attempted to hand out golf balls with a swastika on them, before the man was escorted away.

As Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon called for a second referendum on independence in Scotland to stay in the EU, Trump said this was a "nasty period" and said he does not think Scots would "want to go through that again".

Mr Trump, whose mother was born in Scotland, said the issue of Scottish independence is "up to the people of Scotland" but "we've been through this".

He said: "I'll leave it up to the people.

"I love the people of Scotland. That is why I built, in Aberdeen, one of the great golf courses in the world.

"I've gotten to know the people of Scotland so well through my mother and everything else.

"The people of Scotland are amazing people and that question really has to be addressed to the people.

"It was a very, very close vote and I don't know that people want to go through that again.

"I was here when people were going through that vote.

"I didn't take sides but I will tell you it was a nasty period, and I can't imagine they would go through that again but the people of Scotland may speak differently."

Leave officially passed the winning mark just after 6am as voters demanded the UK untangle itself from the 28-country bloc.

At 7.25am the official result declared Britain had voted for Brexit by 51.9 per cent to 48.1 per cent.

Overall, with all votes now counted, 17,410,742 Britons voted to quit the EU with 16,141,241 voting to Remain. 

