Massive thunderstorms from EUROPE smash into UK and 'could decide' EU referendum vote

2016-06-23

Weather Company

With the result in the balance and the polls neck-and-neck, voter turnout could be key in deciding the outcome of the historic vote.

In London alone the emergency services received more than 300 calls in an hour as more than 6,000 lightning strikes hit.

Several polling stations had to be shut and others opened late as flash floods, thunder and lightning ripped across southern Britain. Even Conservative Party campaign headquarters were flooded, with staff being forced to flee.

PA

Summer storms almost always hit Britain from the Atlantic, in the west. But eerily, the huge storms smashing the country today swept in almost precisely at Midnight, from the direction of Brussels.

James Madden, forecaster for Exacta Weather, said: “It is very unusual to see storms of this ferocity coming over from Europe at this time of year as usually they are driven by activity in the Atlantic.

“Although not unheard of, it is of course very coincidental that the low pressure causing the heavy downpours over Britain today is coming in from Europe.

“Later this afternoon flooding could become a serious risk in the southeast.”

Barcroft Media

Met Office meteorologist Alex Burkill said: “An area of low pressure over France is dragging up warm, humid air causing these heavy, thundery showers.

“The intensity of these showers has been quite high because of the time of year and the higher temperatures."

BNPS

 As we go through the day there could be heavier rainfall across central parts

Met Office forecaster Alex Burkill

Though some academics are sceptical over a correlation, election day traffic has previously been slow when the weather is bad.

As a consequence, the referendum result could be nudged in either direction depending on what the skies have in store.

The overall picture is for a very warm and muggy day today as hot air from the Continent pushes thermometers to a potentially sizzling 30C (86F).

The Met Office has issued severe weather warnings for rain across the region where a month’s worth is forecast to fall in a matter of hours.

LightningMaps

Vigorous thunderstorms also threaten flash floods, violent lightning strikes and power outages in the worst-hit regions.

Heavy showers are forecast to spread more widely during the afternoon and evening - a time when workers traditionally head to the polling stations.

During early evening heavy rain will have reached central England with the region also facing vigorous thunderstorms.

SWNS

Where the rain hits and at what time could have a deciding influence on whether Britain wakes up tomorrow morning still part of Europe.

Latest polls reveal opinion in northern England and Scotland largely favours staying in the EU with just 19 to 33 per cent of people planning to vote out.

Floods cause havoc across Birmingham

GETTY

Heading further south, central England and much of East Anglia is more Eurosceptic with this percentage rising to 44 to 52 per cent.

In southeast England, excluding London, around 38 to 52 per cent of voters want to leave the EU with the capital much lower at 19 to 33 per cent.

The southwest is also more Eurosceptic as is the west, although more people plan to vote to stay than in the far east of Britain.

In the north, where most people seem likely to vote to stay, the Met Office is predicting a dry and largely sunny day with temperatures of between 19C and 21C.

Towards the evening it will turn cloudy with the odd shower but the weather is unlikely to deter people from going out and voting.

In the northeast, where there appear to be fewer Europhiles, the outlook again is for a dry day although showers are likely in the evening.

GETTY

This could put some people off voting although being a smaller region than the rest of the north and Scotland, the weather here should have less of an impact on the overall result.

Central England has a high proportion of Eurosceptics and with a forecast similar to the northeast there is likely to be a high turnout of leavers.

Across Wales and the west, where there is a high percentage of stay voters expected to put their x in the box, the outlook is mostly dry through the day.

The east, like central England, has a high percentage of leavers with analysts identifying around 20 local authorities likely to win the leave vote.

However here is where the heavier and more prolonged showers are forecast to set in from the afternoon with the risk of the odd thunderstorm.

Southern England, where there are around 18 local authorities likely to score a leave majority, is in for the worst of the weather today.

GETTY

The southwest, largely Eurosceptic, will be hit by heavy showers spreading from the southeast through the morning.

However the Met Office predicts the worst of the showers will have passed by the end of the working day meaning it should be a dry turnout during this evening.

The southeast shows a more complicated picture with London consisting of a large proportion of Europhiles while the rest of the region is predominantly Eurosceptic.

Met Office forecaster Alex Burkill warned rainfall in parts could reach the same levels as last week when parts of the country were left knee-deep in floodwater.

He said: “We have a warm plume of air coming into the UK Thursday spreading up from the south east from Wednesday night.

“There are some showers through the morning and into the afternoon coming up from the southeast and moving northwestwards.

“As we go through the day there could be heavier rainfall across central parts of the country which could be an issue - we may issue a warning for these.

“Further west it is staying dry.”

Opinion polls suggest the referendum result could still go either way - it remains to be seen whether the weather will cast the final vote.

Breakdown:

Scotland and the North (lower Brexit support): Largely dry and sunny day, turning cloudier with a few showers in the evening.

Northeast (Slightly higher percentage of Brexiters than further north): Largely dry day with more showers in the evening.

Central England (High Brexit support):  Largely dry day with more showers in the evening.

West (Higher proportion of people wanting to stay in Europe): Largely dry day with some showers in the evening.

East (High proportion of Brexiters): Wetter than northern and central England with the chance of thunder during the afternoon.

Southwest (Around 40 per cent of people plan to vote leave): Wet and rainy during the morning, becoming clearer and drier through the afternoon.

Southeast (Relatively high percentage of leavers): Largely dry with showers around the coast.

London (High support to stay): Heavy rain in the morning, drying out later with thunderstorms predicted in the afternoon.

