The real EU issue is always sovereignty, says Ann Widdecombe

2016-06-22

GETTY

Do you want Britain ruled by a democratically elected government? If your answer to any of those three questions is yes, then vote Leave tomorrow. 

It is no good trying to decide on economic arguments alone because there is simply no united view as to what will happen if we stay in or if we come out. 

Even former chancellors of the exchequer are divided with Lamont and Lawson saying out and Clarke in. 

As for business, Sir Richard Branson says Remain, Sir James Dyson says Leave. And thus it is with academics, politicians, small business, large business and financial practitioners – they cannot agree. 

So we need to take a long-term view because what we are discussing here is the very future of Britain. Will we be free or governed by 27 other countries? 

For it is a certainty that if David Cameron could get no significant concessions from the others under the threat of Brexit we can kiss goodbye to having any influence if we meekly vote to stay in. 

The Remain side often claim that we control 87 per cent of our own laws but that is mere sophistry. 

A law may not be a product of an EU directive but it must still be compatible with EU law, which is supreme. 

I spent seven years as a minister in, variously, Social Security, Pensions, Employment, Prisons and Immigration and in every department I spent an inordinate amount of time resisting EU intervention or making sure whatever we proposed was not likely to suffer challenge under EU law. 

That is just one of many statistics along with trade statistics and those of votes in the Council of Ministers which can be made to look vastly more favourable than they are in reality. 

For example it is often claimed that we are nearly always on the winning side in votes in Europe but that ignores the fact that we are rarely voting for what we actually want. 

Instead we are voting for the best deal we can get – after months of horse-trading – to avoid getting something much worse. 

Unless you have been directly involved in these crazy processes it is easy to be bamboozled by statistics. 



As for imports and exports, the picture changes depending on whether you are looking at percentages, value, goods or services or both. 

However consider this telling comment, published not by Brexit but by the Government’s own Office for National Statistics: “Strong economic growth in many developing economies outside the EU has resulted in non EU economies growing in importance to UK trade with the proportion accounted for by the EU falling consistently since 1999.” 

The same document points out that there is a trade deficit with the EU which has “widened noticeably” since 1999. 

In short the economic case for staying in falls well short of proven so look at the big principles instead: sovereignty, border control, democracy.

Not even the most rabid Remainer can argue that we will have more of each of those if we leave.

----------------------------

GETTY

Jo Cox’s horrible death is tragic but the best tribute to her would be that her cruel fate is used to enhance not diminish our democracy. 

Already, normally hostile journalists have hastened to point out that most MPs are both brave and devoted to the service of their constituents, which makes a change from the usual picture they paint of two-faced, fork-tongued, sleazy, lazy and greedy careerists. 

What a pity an MP has to die to drag forth that admission but it is good for democracy if democratic institutions command broad respect. 

What is not good for democracy is if our representatives do not move freely among us, if they become inaccessible or remote. 

MPs know that every time they walk down the street they take a risk of something happening. I have had custard pies hurled at me in a bookshop, eggs in a church and abuse in the street. 

Interestingly none of that was in my own constituency where I had to call the police to protect me only once in 23 years.

What MPs do not expect is to encounter serious violence and its very rarity should encourage them not to go overboard with security now. Jo walked among her constituents and so should every other MP.

----------------------------

GETTY

Poor old Monty Don, left. 

Angry gardeners and plant sellers are throwing their trowels out of their trugs because he opined that begonias are “repulsive”. 

I disagree, finding them splendidly colourful and cheerful but such matters of taste are just that and one man’s flower is another man’s weed. 

Why should Monty not dislike a particular plant and why should he not say so? 

Perhaps the lawyers will now advertise for begoniagrowers with all the enthusiasm they have shown for PPI victims and encourage them to sue for hurt feelings. Of course that is a joke – at least I dearly hope it is.

----------------------------



GETTY

As many of us predicted, Sir Cliff Richard has been cleared of the ludicrous allegations of sexual assaults but it now emerges that one of his accusers was himself a sex offender and another had tried to blackmail the singer and was being investigated by the police, who dropped their enquiries when the man then made an allegation. 

It used to be the case that a blackmail victim had anonymity but in the crazy world which the police and CPS now inhabit the victim is named and the blackmailer is protected.



As I have said before the CPS needs to find a new formula to replace the phrase “insufficient evidence”. 

The words are legally correct because any allegations in which complainants state that they were assaulted by somebody they knew or could identify at the time are classified as evidence in themselves.

The CPS needs to adopt some such phrase as “no evidence beyond the original allegation”. 

Meanwhile the police should reopen the blackmail investigation or is that too much like justice for them to consider?

----------------------------

GETTY

Some years ago I was invited on to the Michael Parkinson chat show alongside Victoria Wood and Bob Geldof. 

I knew I would like Victoria Wood, who had done an affectionately funny sketch about me on her Christmas show, but I did not expect to warm to Bob Geldof whose vulgar language at one of his big charity concerts repelled me. 

To my surprise he was charm itself and made me, then an overweight middleaged woman, feel a million dollars. 

His manner was entirely courteous, indeed it was positively courtly. Then we found ourselves united about fathers’ rights. 

I had recently written a novel about a man whose ex-wife was trying to prevent him seeing his children and Bob had been through the whole separation-from-children experience himself. 

So for years I have admired Bob Geldof but now it seems as if he has reverted to his old ways with his unbecoming conduct on the Thames last week in the Remain flotilla. 

All I can say is thank heaven he is on that side of the argument so I need feel only disappointed by his rudery rather than embarrassed.

