REVEALED: Four million migrants entered the UK in past 20 years

2016-06-21

GETTY

Numbers since the last Labour government relaxed controls equal the combined populations of Birmingham, Manchester and Glasgow. 

Over two decades net migration – the difference between those entering and leaving – has averaged 214,157 a year and is growing. 

Last year it reached record of 333,000, half from the EU. 

Critics said the Office for National Statistics data makes a mockery of Prime Minister David Cameron’s pledge to slash the rate to tens of thousands a year. 

On the eve of the historic EU referendum Brexit campaigners called on Britain to seize a “golden opportunity” to take back control of our borders and close the UK’s open door. 

Tory MP Jacob Rees-Mogg said: “Tomorrow’s vote is all about democracy and whether people can change anything. Nobody stood for Parliament saying four million people could come to this country.

GETT

“It’s as if the lock has been picked by a burglar and the front door has been left wide open. By leaving the EU we can put a bolt on it.”

 We will never be able to control immigration inside the EU

Nigel Farage

Labour opened the country up to mass migration to enrich communities and plug gaps in the jobs market. 

But polls suggest it left the UK deeply divided while stretching public services to breaking point. 

International passenger survey statistics show 4,069,000 people have come to the UK since Labour leader Tony Blair swept to power. 



Ukip leader Nigel Farage said: “We will never be able to control immigration inside the EU.” 

Migration Watch UK has warned of “serious consequences” over the next 20 years if Britain votes to remain in the EU. 

Last year 52,000 Romanians and Bulgarians arrived here to work but only 31,000 had a job to go to. 

GETTY

GETTY

There are now 2.1 million EU nationals and 1.2 million non-EU nationals working in the UK. 

Tory MP Stewart Jackson said: “These figures are truly astounding and deeply troubling. We need a fair, open Australian-style points based immigration system.’’ 

Ukip MEP Steven Woolfe said: “Mass migration at this level into the UK is simply unsustainable. 

“The government needs to control the numbers coming to the UK to plan for infrastructure projects.”

The Home Office said: “The Government’s ambition remains to reduce annual net migration to the tens of thousands.”

