The Who's Roger Daltrey to be honoured with prestigious Music Industry Trusts Award

2016-06-21

GETTY

Daltrey, credited as the founding member of the popular band, will be awarded the 25th Music Industry Trusts Award (MITs).

The accolade recognises the contribution an individual has made to the music industry across various spheres including producing, composing film scores and song writing - as well as charity work.

He said: "It's great to be honoured by my friends and colleagues in the music industry in this way in the 25th year of the Music Industry Trusts Award.

"Nordoff Robbins and the Brit trust are wonderful charities. The Who were there at the beginning and I am proud to join the honourees that have received this award before me and themselves done so much not only for these charities, but also for many others."

He will be given the award at a ceremony in November which will be held in aid of music therapy charity Nordoff Robbins and the Brit Trust, which is "the charitable arm of the British Record Industry".

Chairman of the Mits Award committee, David Munns OBE, said: "Roger Daltrey embodies the ethos of the Mits Award and is a deserving honouree in this milestone year.

"We are proud to recognise not only Roger's musical output, both as a solo performer and as part of The Who, but also his tireless dedication for charitable causes and in particular the Teenage Cancer Trust which has helped thousands of young people throughout the UK and worldwide.

Britney Spears, Kate Beckinsale & Heidi Klum work the red carpet

GETTY

GETTY

"Roger Daltrey is an inspiration when it comes to personal devotion to charities and is a worthy recipient in this historic year."

Last year's recipient was Simon Cowell and other names honoured over the years include Sir Elton John, Jools Holland OBE, Gary Barlow OBE, Annie Lennox OBE and many more.

GETTY

Along with the other members of The Who - including Pete Townshend - the 72-year-old has raised millions for a multitude of charities. He has also been a patron of the Teenage Cancer Trust since 2000.

