'You'll interrupt yourself in a minute!' Tetchy PM snaps in tense John Humphrys interview

2016-06-22

Mr Cameron appeared to be in an irritable mood during his interview on Radio 4 with John Humphrys as the referendum campaign entered its final hours.

The Prime Minister said he had negotiated "very important advantages" for Britain with his renegotiations over the UK's EU membership.

And he hit back when Humphrys suggested his much-vaunted restriction for migrant in-work benefits did not amount to a "hill of beans".

Mr Cameron said: "What it means is that if people come here they can’t claim unemployment benefit.

GETTY

 You’ll interrupt yourself in a moment if you don’t watch it

David Cameron to John Humphrys

"If they don’t have a job after six months they have to leave.

"And if they do get a job they have to work for four years before they get full access to our welfare system.

"For years people have been complaining about 'something for nothing'. This ends 'something for nothing'.

The prime minister, who has seen his Cabinet and party divided by the EU referendum, repeatedly told Humphrys to stop interrupting him during the interview.

"You’ll interrupt yourself in a moment if you don’t watch it," he snapped.

A Royal Wedding, The Wombles and a new James Bond

When asked if he would stay as prime minister if Remain loses Mr Cameron said: "I will accept the instructions of the British people.”

In regard to immigration, Mr Cameron said his former adviser Steve Hilton, who claims the government knew it would be unable to lower net migration, was wrong.

He said: "It is simply not true.

"When he left net migration was falling from around 220,000 down to 154,000."

Humphrys then said: "And now it is at a third of a million."

Mr Cameron added that more needs to be done to lower net migration from outside the EU.

He said: "The wrong thing to do is to leave the single market, damage our economy, damage our businesses.

"That would be a very bad outcome.

PA

"Not just for the economy but for families and for businesses and for jobs up and down our country.

"That is the most important thing in this referendum."

Mr Cameron’s campaign rival, and possible successor, Boris Johnson has kicked off a cross-country helicopter tour of the nation as he makes the Leave campaign’s case for Brexit.

Speaking to the BBC from Essex he said: "We can begin the process of extracting ourselves from the burdensome and anti-democratic system of government. 

"Take back control of our borders so the European court can no longer decide to have people we want to deport on our streets."

