Leave four points behind in penultimate EU poll - but hope still remains for Brexiters

2016-06-23

GETTY • PA

With polling stations now closed across the UK, it can be reported the last Ipsos MORI survey of the referendum campaign found 52 per cent wanted Britain to Remain in the EU while 48 per cent wanted the country to quit the 28-country bloc.

The result is based on the views of those most likely to vote and who say the result is important to them, while still undecided voters were excluded.

The lead for Remain follows a series of polls showing a swing in opinion back to staying in the EU following a surge for Brexit last week.

The final online Populus poll of the referendum campaign put Remain ten points ahead of Leave by 55 per cent to 45 per cent.

A week ago Ipsos MORI put Leave six points ahead over Remain by 53 per cent to 47 per cent.

But that result was based on likely voters only (not on those who say the result is important to them as well).

Using the equivalent method, the pollsters' latest survey put Remain just two points ahead of Leave by 51 per cent to 49 per cent.

Despite the poll result, there is still hope for Brexit campaigners with 12 per cent having said they may change their mind before going to vote.

 Our final poll suggests it is very close

Gideon Skinner, head of political research at Ipsos MORI

The late swing back to Remain might be explained by the economy becoming a greater focus for voters over the last week of the campaign.

Although immigration remains the top issue for voters with one in three (32 per cent) saying it was one of the most important factors in how they would decide to vote, those mentioning the economy a major issue moved up three points to 31 per cent.

Both the Prime Minister and Chancellor George Osborne have told voters a Brexit vote will push the country into a recession, with David Cameron making a surprise - and controversial - plea to voters to Remain directly from Downing Street this week.

Ipsos MORI interviewed more than 1,500 adults across Britain on Tuesday and Wednesday this week.

Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), makes a statement after Britain voted to leave on the European Union

Gideon Skinner, head of political research at Ipsos MORI, said: “Our final poll suggests it is very close, and even though Remain has had more momentum this week, probability models suggest Leave still has a one in four chance to win.

“The referendum has revealed clear splits among the British public – they themselves just about expect Remain to win, but many simply don’t know – even as one in eight could still change their minds.

“Despite all of this, two in three think calling the referendum was the right thing to do.”

