Now toothless Brussels to give Turkey MORE TIME to join EU despite Ankara missing deadline

2016-06-16

GETTY

Ankara will miss the end of June deadline to meet the conditions but negotiations with the European Commission will continue after talks showed "bright spots".

However a Commission official has revealed "there were no major developments on the benchmarks" being met by Turkey to agree a deal.

An agreement to give Turks visa-free travel to Europe in return for stemming the flow of migrants to the bloc has been delayed by a disagreement over Ankara’s controversial anti-terror laws.

But the bungling EU will allow Turkey even more time to meet all the conditions.

Greek Orthodox monk welcoming refugees arriving on a dinghy on a northeastern coast of the island of Lesvos, Greece

 I believe the migration crisis is bringing Turkey closer to Europe

Dimitris Avramopoulos

Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdogan said: "I believe we can get a positive result on this issue which would take into consideration Turkey's sensitivity about the struggle with terrorism."

The European commissioner for migration, Dimitris Avramopoulos revealed visa-free travel will be ready for Turkey "soon, but I can't be more precise".

He added: "We have seen some positive progress.

"I believe the migration crisis is bringing Turkey closer to Europe."

GETTY

But a statement from the Commission said that "while there has been further good progress in its implementation, progress achieved so far remains fragile."

The prospect of Turkey joining the EU has enraged those supporting a Brexit.

Vote Leave claimed yesterday Britain has given its blessing for Turkey to join the EU.

GETTY

UK diplomats initially resisted allowing Ankara to open fresh talks on joining the bloc but backed down within hours, the Brexit camp said.

Vote Leave chief executive Matthew Elliott said: "This is the second time this week that the Government's plans to accelerate visa-free travel and EU membership for Turkey have been revealed.

"David Cameron said he wants to 'pave the road from Ankara' and the Brussels negotiations to make this happen are well under way."

