Pound in freefall as markets react with horror to UK’s Brexit decision

2016-06-23

GETTY

The pound dropped more than 10 percent against the dollar and share trading in Japan was halted as market panic spread.

The currency sank to $1.34 against the dollar after Britain voted to cut ties with the European Union.

Last night the pound was at its highest level against the dollar for more than a year, $1.4900, as the Remain campaign looked assured of victory. 

Leave.EU co-chairman and co-founder Richard Tice blasted Downing Street for the market turmoil.

SG

He said: "When looking for reasons the pound has dropped after we voted to leave the European Union we need look no further than number 10 and 11 Downing Street and their complicit international institutions.

 "Their scare stories weren’t enough to panic the British public into voting remain but they most certainly have been enough to concern investors unnecessarily in the short term.

"The UK is a strong economy with fantastic hard working people and we can continue to go from strength to strength."

Nigel Farage almost admitted defeat at midnight, but has now proclaimed a romping win for the Leave campaign.

Simon Derrick, of BNY Mellon, says: "Self evidently a number of investors will have found themselves on the wrong side of the price action in the past few hours.

"It therefore look very likely that today will see a record fall for the pound, easily beating Black Wednesday's move. Indeed, it seems fair to say that today will soon start to be referred to as a Black Friday for markets."

 

GETTY

As the currency slides, investors are expecting imminent action from the Bank of England.

Policymakers could unleash monetary stimulus in an effort to support growth.

Danny Blanchflower, a former Bank policymaker, suggests interest rate cuts are now on the table.

GETTY

While currency traders may already have their heads in their hands there are still more than four hours until UK stocks starting trading and the market figures are set to fluctuate.

Out of hours betting and futures activity suggest there could be chaos when the London Stock Exchange opens at 8am.

The FTSE 100 is expected to fall by more than 7.7pc, or nearly 500 points on the open.

The Leave campaign officially claimed victory this morning after votes to quit the EU passed the mathematical threshold where Remain cannot catch up.

