'All we can do is PRAY' Worried EU officials desperately await Britain's Brexit decision

2016-06-21

Getty

EU civil servants and politicians have been told to keep tight-lipped during the campaign period over fears they might tip the balance in favour of Britons voting to leave.

David Cameron is widely believed to have made European Commission boss, Jean-Claude Juncker, and his team promise to stay quiet.

And now staff have revealed nerves are getting the best of them, with a general feeling of helplessness taking over the European Commission.

 I’m not a believer, but all you can do is pray at this point

Former EU prime minister

One senior diplomat told Politico: “They’re very nervous.

“They’re feel there’s nothing they can do.

“They say they will just have to wait until Friday.”

Getty

Following last week’s surge in the polls for the Leave campaign, European Council President Donald Tusk said it was “very difficult to be optimistic” about Thursday when Britons go to the ballot box.

A former EU prime minister, who wished to remain anonymous, reportedly said: “I’m not a believer, but all you can do is pray at this point.”

For some it is not just a feeling of helplessness washing over Brussels, with other staff getting more angry and frustrated as the days go on.

Chris Kendall, the European External Action SErvice’s political counsellor for strategy and communications, tweeted he was “hugely f***ing p****d off at the whole awful business and where it has brought us”.

Other officials are taking each day as it comes as they believe Brussels could weather out the storm if Brexit does happen on Friday.

Getty

Getty

A British senior Commission official, added: “The stakes for my country are higher than at any time in my life so clearly everyone is watching very closely.

“But I really don’t know any seasoned officials who do anxiety.

“Stiff upper lip, prayer, but not anguish.”

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

In the European Parliament, a mixture of feelings of anger and frustration have been expressed.

German MEP David McAllister, who is half Scottish, said he will go to Britain this week for the Referendum on Thursday.

He said: “Everyone in Brussels who is interested in the future of the European Union will be not be sleeping from Thursday to Friday night. 

“We all know it will be a very close race and I believe it has a lot to do with turnout, the higher the turnout the better for remaining.”

British Socialists and Democrats Group MEP, Richard Corbett, said he was unimpressed with the way the discussion in Britain has gone over the past few days.

He said: “I feel apprehensive.

“The media has focused on internal debates inside the Conservative party so it was difficult for other parties to get their message across.”

