Eurosceptic Polish people must HELP Britain leave EU NOW, says POLES FOR BRITAIN

2016-06-16

GETTY/PH

These two nations who fought side by side as brothers in arms against the greatest evil the world has ever seen should feel obliged to do all they can to ensure their respective freedom and self-determination. 

The fact that throughout their long histories Great Britain and Poland never clashed makes them a rarity on the European continent. 

In recent years both great countries have yet again been brought closer - not just by virtue of mutual military commitment to Atlanticism but also within the European Union.

And it certainly has not been through Britain and Poland embracing the “Bruxelian dream”. 

To the contrary, as the Eurozone crisis escalated, the “ever more Europe” Berlin dominance on the continent increased, hence pushing Great Britain towards the EU periphery. 

There we became a natural ally of the Eastern non-Eurozone Visegrad Group, with Poland acting as its unofficial leader by virtue of her relative size.

GETTY

 The recently naturalised Polish voters are largely eurosceptic

Increasingly weary of the German hegemony wielded via the European Commission filled with Teutophile yes-men puppets and using the EU as a vehicle to subdue the Eurozone’s Club Med and further Berlin's economic interests, Great Britain and Poland formed a common front within the European Parliament.

The largest opposition in Brussels, the European Conservatives and Reformists group (ECR), was formed by the British Conservative Party MEPs and their Polish Law and Justice (Prawo i Sprawiedliwo??, or PiS) counterparts. 

The smaller opposition group Europe of Freedom and Direct Democracy (EFDD), where the UKIP MEPs sit, was propped up by a Pole seconded by the Congress of New Right (Kongres Nowej Prawicy) as a gesture of good will. 

Majority of delegates that both nations send to Brussels are euro-realists or eurosceptics and have worked together for years in opposing the EU power grabs by the Union's German masters. 

After all, the Iron Lady Margaret Thatcher is arguably more revered in Poland than over here!

Poles for Britain aim at continuing this gallant tradition. 

As the referendum approached, it became clear that there were many eurosceptic voices within the British-Polish community; not only born here but also those who recently opted for the superior Anglo-Saxon environment.

As one of the more active British-Polish eurosceptics, and backed by popular demand, I founded this group within Vote Leave to bring all under one roof. 



Our patrons are: the only Polish-born MP, Daniel Kawczynski, and the famous portrait artist Basia Hamilton.

We are not party-aligned and come from various walks of life, blue and white collar alike.

We have a decent presence on the ground, with some of us regularly supporting the Leave campaign in areas with large Polish population, Ealing in London being one example.

So now that Great Britain stands on the brink of freedom or at least a serious renegotiation, depending on whether you believe that the EU will let us go or not, the Poles should absolutely support the British struggle. 

David Cameron has not managed to secure anything meaningful from Brussels. Therefore, demonstrating the will of our nation to leave might be the only way of forcing the EU to reform. 

GETTY

Given the size of our economy and our net contribution to the EU, as well as the balance of trade with the continent and Germany in particular, it is hard to imagine that the Schulzs, Junckers and Tusks won’t bend backwards when served with a British leave notice. 

And even if Britain were to go, Germany would be forced to massively loosen its grip on the EU in a bid to stop the domino effect, hence affording the likes of Poland greater breathing space.

Just as in the Battle of Britain and numerous other campaigns across Europe, North Africa and the Middle East, Poles should help the Britons now - it would be patriotic to do so. 

Some will of course refer to the disappointments of Yalta and Tehran, when the Soviets were allowed to capture Poland, and it would be a fair criticism. 

GETTY

However, Great Britain went to war in 1939 to fulfil alliance obligations towards Poland. Subsequently, London became home to Polish Government in Exile, hence allowing Poland's legitimate governance to continue all the way until 1990, when the communist occupation of Poland ended and its powers could be ceded to Warsaw. 

Many Polish patriotic soldiers fighting the communist occupation in the post-war Poland of late 1940s and 1950s, some of my ancestors included, took their orders directly from the Polish government in London, which proved its continued influence on the home soil.

Camaraderie and history aside, some still wonder why Poles would support Brexit... Poles born here are assimilated or consider themselves outright British, hence support Brexit as much as the rest of the British nation. 



The recently naturalised Polish voters are largely eurosceptic and now have safeguards from Vote Leave proposing indefinite leave to remain for EU residents. 

Poles know full well that along with the British society most would benefit from increased local spending once the expenditure on EU goes away, less red tape, increased business opportunities by opening up onto the world, lighter taxation, even higher wages as famously announced by Lord Rose of Stronger In. 

After all, Poland joined the EU just twelve years ago and many still remember Poland’s GDP growth only dropped below 5 per cent on three occasions in the 1990s. It has been a completely different story since the EU accession!

Will Poles therefore yet again stand with their British allies in defence of freedom and democracy? Without a doubt!

