I wouldn't feel safe sending my kids to some A&E departments, says leading nurse

2016-06-22

GETTY

Janet Youd, the chair of the Royal College of Nursing’s Emergency Care association, said patients – including children and the elderly – “are dying” as a result of staff lacking vital skills and training.

She told the RCN’s annual conference that more than half of sick children brought to A&E are not dealt with “in a timely manner”.

GETTY

The senior nurse told the Glasgow meeting: “There are some emergency departments that I wouldn’t feel safe sending my children or family to.

“If you have an emergency today with your child, your grandmother, you could go to an emergency department and it would be sheer luck that would have a nurse with the right skills, the right training to be able to treat you.”

Ms Youd, a paediatric care expert, went on to say that “seriously sick” A&E patients had a “minimal” chance of their crippling conditions being spotted.

TWITTER

She said: "The chances of something being spotted if you are seriously sick are minimal. 

“More than half of children presenting in A&E do not get the right observations in a timely manner. Patients are dying as a result."

Other shocking revelations from the RCN’s conference include accounts of patients being left in corridors and storage facilities as cash-strapped hospitals struggle for space.

PH

And the group’s general secretary Janet Davies claimed “aggressive public health funding cuts” could jeopardise the health of the nation.

She said: "The RCN's major worry is that efforts to tackle the issues and to help people live healthier lives are in danger of going backwards because of aggressive public health funding cuts.”

NHS funding has become a political football in the increasingly bitter EU referendum debate.

The Leave campaign argues that Brexit could save the health service by redirecting funding from the EU budget and cutting immigration to reduce pressure on services.

But the Remain camp has warned that Brexit could result in an NHS staffing crisis and aftershocks on the economy would reduce funding for healthcare.

