When will EU referendum campaigning resume? Groups speak out after Jo Cox's death

2016-06-17

GETTY

Both sides of the Brexit debate have cancelled national events tomorrow after the 41-year-old politician was fatally shot and stabbed in her Batley and Spen constituency.

It means campaigning will have been on hold for the best part of three days ahead of next Thursday’s historic vote.

Official lead campaigns Vote Leave and Britain Stronger in Europe have both said they are suspending their national campaign events on Saturday.

But local-level campaigning such as leafleting will take place.

Ukip have also suspended campaigning at a national level tomorrow, while Labour have cancelled campaigning for the entire weekend.

 Vote Leave will be suspending major campaign events tomorrow such as the planned rally in Birmingham.

Vote Leave statement

A Vote Leave statement said: “Vote Leave will be suspending major campaign events tomorrow such as the planned rally in Birmingham.

“Low key campaigning like leafleting at a local level is likely to take place."

Will Straw, the executive director of Britain Stronger in Europe, said: "The campaign will continue to suspend all its planned national campaign events, street stalls, and rallies tomorrow as a mark of respect for the tragic murder of Jo Cox.

“Volunteers may choose to continue door-to-door leafleting in their own local areas, but the campaign nationally will not be doing so.

“We will also be making available tribute books for volunteers and members of the public who wish to mark their respects."

School children and teachers throw flowers on to the hearse carrying murdered Member of Parliament Jo Cox's as her funeral cortege will passes through Heckmondwike in northern Britain

Both official campaigns have yet to confirm whether or not they will return to campaigning on Sunday.

On Monday, MPs will return from a parliamentary recess for the referendum to pay tributes to mother-of-two Mrs Cox in the House of Commons.

The EU referendum on June 23 can only be postponed to a later date if Parliament passes new legislation.

