PROJECT FEAR BLOW: Rental market will 'carry on as normal after Brexit'

2016-06-22

GETTY

Despite fear-mongering claims from the Remain campaign, experts expected the rental market to be little affected if Britain votes to leave the EU, found the Association of Residential Letting Agents (Arla). Two-thirds of agents survey by the trade body said the supply and demand of private rental properties will be broadly the same if there is a Brexit vote.The majority also think that rental prices will hold steady in the event of an exit from the EU.The biggest affect could be in London, where rent prices have been pushed sky-high thanks to huge demand. 

GETTY

David Cox, managing director of Arla, said: "The lettings market hosts a large number of non-UK born citizens and any change in migration policy is likely to have an impact down the line, especially in London. "However, our monthly report clearly shows the sentiment amongst members is that the immediacy of this effect is likely to be minimal."It comes as foreign investors pile into the UK housing market to snap up bargain amid a recent fall in the pound. A home in London has become around €33,200 - or £26,000 - cheaper since November last year, as sterling has steadily weakened, according to estate agents Stirling Ackroyd. The pick-up in demand aged of the referendum shows the resilience of the capital's property market, said the property firm.

Peterborough, Cambridgeshire

Andrew Bridges, managing director of Stirling Ackroyd, said: "After the referendum chatter has calmed down the bright lights of London will be undimmed – whatever the result. London’s resilience is second to none."He added: “Speculation about the aftermath of the result is rife, but London’s reputation as a valuable property investment hotspot remains undiminished. "The capital is fully equipped to combat the consequences of either a Remain or a Brexit vote, and London will continue to attract an abundance of potential buyers and retain its global capital city status. "A ballot paper may prove an unequal opponent to London’s property power.”

