Race not over yet as THIRD poll puts Brexit in the lead

2016-06-23

GETTY

There were no exit polls in the vote, but a YouGov opinion poll released as polling stations closed put Remain ahead by 52 per cent to 48 per cent.

And pollsters Mori have Remain at 54 per cent following analysis from yesterday and today - a bigger lead than that projected by YouGov's poll

However, a third poll carried out on 10,000 people and commissioned by the Leave group revealed 52 per cent would vote for a Brexit compared to 48 per cent who said they would vote Remain.



REUTERS

A record number of voters were eligible to take part in the referendum, with the Electoral Commission putting the number at 46,499,537.

Anecdotal evidence from around the country suggests that turn-out has been high in many areas.

Leave campaign standard-bearer Boris Johnson had a last-minute dash to vote in north London, due to a delay to his flight from Scotland after attending his daughter's university graduation ceremony - finally reaching the polling station with less than 25 minutes to spare.

Waiting for his plane in Edinburgh, he told reporters that polls had been "very close" but turnout was "good in areas where we need it to be".

Ukip leader Nigel Farage insisted his side could pull off an historic victory if "soft" Remain voters in the capital stayed home because of the bad weather.

Those backing Brexit had the "real conviction and passion" to cast their vote regardless of the conditions, he said.



PA

Prime Minister David Cameron ignored questions as he arrived with wife Samantha to cast their votes at Methodist Hall in Westminster, saying only "Good morning" to the gathered media from across the world.

And pro-Leave Justice Secretary Michael Gove said he was feeling "quite excited" as he accompanied his wife, Sarah Vine, to a polling station in west London.



Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn - who has been accused of campaigning half-heartedly in the Remain cause - said he was "extremely" confident of the outcome, pointing to bookmakers' odds which have consistently favoured continued EU membership despite fluctuations in the polls.

