A little late for that? Brussels boss calls on EU to have ‘long, hard look’ at itself

2016-06-20

GETTY

With just three days to go until the UK decides whether or not to quit the EU, European Council president Donald Tusk made a desperate plea to British voters.

The former Polish prime minister warned “the whole Western and transatlantic community” will be weakened if the UK opts for Brexit on Thursday.

Recent polls have put Remain and Leave neck-and-neck ahead of the country’s historic in/out EU referendum.

Speaking in Lisbon after meeting with Portugal’s prime minister, Mr Tusk said: “I would like to appeal to the British citizens, on behalf, I know that for a fact, of almost all Europeans and European leaders: Stay with us. We need you.

“Without you, not only Europe, but the whole Western and transatlantic community will become weaker.

“Together, we will be able to cope with increasingly difficult challenges of the future. I am absolutely sure about this.

“If apart, it will be more difficult. And I am also absolutely sure about that.”

 We must take a long, hard look on the future of the Union.

Donald Tusk

Mr Tusk signalled Brussels bosses have been left shocked by the level of support for Brexit in the UK.

And the president claimed the EU needed a re-think to stem the tide of euroscepticism growing across the 28-country bloc, whatever the result of the Brexit vote.

Many Brussels officials fear a Brexit vote could lead to a ‘domino effect’ with a number of other countries looking to escape the bloc.

He said: “We must take a long, hard look on the future of the Union.

“We would be foolish if we ignored such a warning signal as the UK referendum.

“There are more signals of dissatisfaction with the Union coming from all of Europe, not only from the UK.”

Mr Tusk helped stitch together David Cameron’s renegotiation of Britain’s EU membership in February, before the Prime Minister officially called the referendum.

Despite the Tory leader’s reforms being dismissed as ‘pathetic’ and ‘watered-down thin gruel’ by his own MPs, at the time Mr Tusk insisted EU leaders had “done all we could” to give Mr Cameron a deal that would keep Britain tied to Brussels.



Mr Tusk will chair the next summit of EU leaders next Tuesday and Wednesday in Brussels, when they will discuss how to respond to whether Britons have voted to stay or leave the bloc.

If Mr Cameron hands in a formal notice of Britain's intent to leave the EU, the other 27 leaders will have to set up a negotiating system to settle terms for divorce.

But if Britain votes to stay under Brussels rule, next week's summit will discuss how to push the Prime Minister’s renegotiation package through other EU institutions such as the European Parliament.

Leading MEPs have already vowed to block key parts of Mr Cameron’s reform deal.

Responding to Mr Tusk’s comments, Ukip’s deputy leader welcomed the fact the top Brussels boss had noticed the huge dissatisfaction with the EU within Britain - despite noting how the bloc usually ignores national votes.

He told Express.co.uk: “How novel it is to hear the EU talking about the potential results of a referendum when both the Dutch and the Danes know what it’s like to be ignored when they vote.

“The fact that they are worrying this could cause a domino effect throughout the EU really tells you all you need to know about where their interests lie.

“One of the joys of being part of Europe but not the EU is that we are a collection of different cultures who rub alongside each other quite nicely.

“But what we don’t need is an undemocratic political construct telling all of these different cultures what to do.

“Roll on Thursday!”

