Why did Nigel Farage pull out of last EU debate? Ukip leader heads to the polls

2016-06-23

PA

Tony Blair's former spin doctor Alastair Campbell was branded "callous" and "pathetic" last night as he attempted to use of Nigel Farage's withdrawal from a EU Referendum TV debate for political advantage.

A personal situation meant the Ukip leader cancelled his appearance on the Channel 4 show yesterday evening, which was the final televised event before today's vote. 

A spokesman for Mr Farage said that he could not take part because of "family reasons" and the party offered up MEP Steven Woolfe as a replacement, but this was rejected by the broadcaster. 

But there was immediate controversy over the issue as Mr Campbell, one of those involved, courted controversy by accusing Mr Farage of "bottling it". 

Sources sugges Mr Farage dropped out to go for dinner with his eldest son instead. 

A source said: "He hadn't seen him for nine months so it was between that or being on against the founder of Ukip who calls him racist. It was a no brainer."

It remains unclear why he hasn't seen his 27-year-old son who works for KPMG for nine months. 

Mr Farage refused to elaborate on his reasons for not attending, simply citing "family reasons" when he spoke outside his home this morning. 

He recently said: "I've got a son who works for one of the corporates and he's been told 'You must vote to remain part of this otherwise terrible things will happen'."

The father-of-four has two grown up sons from his first marriage with ex-wife Grainne. Mr Farage married his second wife Kirsten in 1999 and they have wo daughters aged nine and 14. 

The Labour ex-official posted a picture of himself and fellow participant celebrity chef Delia Smith on Twitter captioned: "All so sad Farage has bottled it". 



Delia bang on message before the great debate. All so sad Farage has bottled it pic.twitter.com/JFR53YZuuM

Alan Johnson Delia me and @junesarpong warming up for the C4 debate that @Nigel_Farage he bottled pic.twitter.com/CdXDNmPAQw

But he was immediately savaged by social media users, who branded him "callous" and "pathetic" for taking advantage of a personal situation for political gain. 

One user tweeted back in reply: "Bottled it for family reasons? Oh dear... You may end up looking a little callous." 

Another added: "That was cowardly. When has Nigel ever ducked out of a debate? I hope you end up with egg on your face." 

And a third said: "You've just slated a man who puts family above political ambition. You're an embarrassment."

Even users who said they were not fans of the Ukip leader called on Mr Campbell to show more respect, with one saying the Leave campaign would have been "vilified" for saying something so insensitive.

PA

PA

The debate, hosted by Jeremy Paxman, will also feature Labour's pro-EU campaign leader Alan Johnson and former First Minister of Scotland Alex Salmond for the Remain camp and businessman Theo Paphitis and Tory MP Jacob Rees-Mogg MP for Leave.

Earlier on Wednesday Nigel Farage refused to apologise for his controversial "breaking point" immigration poster, despite suggestions by his party that he had.

The Ukip leader was quizzed over the poster, which depicts a snaking line of hundreds of immigrants arriving in Europe, after Ukip politician Diane Jones suggested he regretted it.

Speaking in central London, Mr Farage said: "I apologise for the timing and I apologise for the fact that it was able to be used by those who wish us harm.

"But I can't apologise for the truth. And after all, this was a photograph your newspaper carried, this was a photograph that all newspapers carried, it is an example of what is wrong inside the European Union."



AFP

He said the decision by German Chancellor Angela Merkel to welcome so many migrants into Europe has "created divisions between countries".

He made his comments following his final speech on the campaign trail urging people to vote Leave in Thursday's referendum.

Speaking to press from all over the world and Vote Leave supporters in Westminster, Mr Farage said: "Let's stop pretending what this European project is - they have an anthem, they are building an army, they have already got their own police force, and of course they have got a flag.

"At the end of the day tomorrow when people vote they have to make a decision - which flag is their's?"



