Cameron’s Remain campaign is ‘becoming HYSTERICAL’, Prime Minister’s former aide blasts

2016-06-16

The Prime Minister’s former director of strategy Steve Hilton condemned the ‘In’ camp for ploughing the public with “entirely negative” propaganda.

Discussing the post-Brexit threats delivered by George Osborne yesterday, Mr Hilton – who worked for Cameron for two years – told Newsnight: "I saw that this morning and my heart sank.

BBC

 It has become less and less reasonable and more and more hysterical

Steve Hilton

"The best response during the debate was from David Cameron who said in his view that on balance we are better off in.

"Since he has said that at the start of the campaign, it has become less and less reasonable and more and more hysterical, and today was the worst of that."

BBC

The Chancellor revealed he would draft an "emergency post-Brexit budget" that could slash funding to the NHS and hike up taxes as a result of leaving the EU.

The former close advisor hailed Vote Leave and Michael Gove for putting forward "positive proposals".

He said: "It is about putting forward an argument and explaining why people should vote one way or the other and you saw the Leave campaign making positive proposals of what they would do if the vote goes their way.

The leaflet being used as toilet paper

"I think that is a big contrast to the entirely negative stuff we are hearing from the other side."

Hilton also said a vote to leave the EU is about "putting power in people's hands”.

He added: "It is about putting power in people's hands that is what this is about and what I have argued for in politics.

GETTY

"It is about giving people control about what matters to them."

Mr Hilton's comments come as campaigner for Vote Leave Mr Gove made a passionate speech about quitting the union.

BBC

Appearing on Question Time last night, the Cabinet minister said: "There are young people who are suffering in Greece, Portugal and Spain because of the EU.

"The EU is a job-destroying machine and to use a phrase from English literature, that is a tragedy."

