'When you challenge the establishment they go after you' Farage hits back in poster row

2016-06-20

Last week the Ukip leader unveiled a poster with an image of migrants entering Europe last year emblazoned with the slogan 'Breaking Point' and the message 'The EU has failed us'.

On Sunday various politicians lined up to criticise the poster. Mr Gove said he "shuddered" when he saw it while the Chancellor said it was "disgusting" and linked it to Nazi propaganda. 

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn had earlier described it as "appalling".

But appearing on Peston on Sunday on ITV, Mr Farage denied promoting hatred, claiming he himself was being targeted.

ITV•GETTY

He said: "When you challenge the establishment, they go after you."

Reacting to criticism from Mr Gove, his fellow Brexiteer, he said: "They have been doing very strong posters, not only about Turkey but about the number of terrorists and criminals who come into Britain under free movement rules."

Mr Farage added: "All we have said in this referendum campaign is we want to take back control of our lives, take back control of our borders and put in place a responsible immigration policy.

"When it comes to negativity and rhetoric we have seen far more of it from the Remain side.

"This referendum is about us leaving a failing European Union."

BBC

 When I saw that poster I shuddered

Michael Gove

Appearing on the same show Mr Osborne, who is campaigning for Remain, said: "There are perfectly legitimate concerns about migration, concerns that are felt in every Western democracy in the world.

"But I think there is a difference between addressing those concerns in a reasonable way and whipping up concerns, whipping up division, making baseless assertions that millions of people are going to come into the country in the next couple of years from Turkey, saying that dead bodies are going to wash up on the beaches of Kent, or indeed putting up that disgusting and vile poster that Nigel Farage did, which had echoes of literature used in the 1930s.”

Fellow Tory Mr Gove said: "When I saw that poster I shuddered. 

"I thought it was the wrong thing to do. 

"I am pro-migration but I believe that the way in which we secure public support for the continued benefits that migration brings and the way in which we secure public support for helping refugees in need is if people feel they can control the numbers overall coming here."

