‘You’re getting on a bit’ Jeremy Paxman insults Sheila Hancock in live EU debate

2016-06-23

The actress, 83, was representing the Remain voters in one of many segments on the rowdy show, which featured a lot of prolific public figures of varying renown talking over each-other.

Opening one discussion, Jeremy, 66, said: “I don’t want to be rude but you’re getting on a bit.”

There was a brief moment of shock in the room, before Sheila embarked on a monologue that drew a rousing response online.

When Jeremy reminded her that many older people are voting for Leave, she countered: “I’m 83. being 83… What it means is that I was a child during the war. 

CHANNEL 4

CHANNEL 4

 I don’t want to be rude but you’re getting on a bit

Jeremy Paxman

“And I want to go through the origins: I was bombed, evacuated, I had a horrible, horrible time and I hated the Germans. My first husband was air crew during the war. He was older than me. He bombed and killed Germans and it haunted him for the rest of his life. 

“My mother and father lived through two World Wars that started in Europe. The second cost 51 million lives. 

“When I was told that we were going to unite with our enemies to build a better future, I rejoiced. Obviously a vision like that was going to go horribly wrong. But look at the situation we’re in now. The problems are global. 

“It’s not just migration. It’s a shift of populations, as we had at the end of the war. There’s ecological problems, environmental problems, there’s huge discrepancy between the rich and the poor. 

CHANNEL 4



“That should worry us because that leads to extremity.”

She added: “Surely we can solve those problems better if we’re united than if we close ourselves down, close our eyes and hate the foreigners. 

“I am so proud to be British. I’m also proud to be European. If I wake up and discover I am no longer European, I will be heartbroken.”

Later in the programme, politician Alex Salmond said: “Sheila Hancock should be running the Remain campaign. We’d be winning by a mile!”

