'He is speaking the truth' Alex Salmond does not see the fuss over Jean-Claude Juncker

2016-06-22

Mr Juncker, the European Commission president, has said there will be no more negotiations of any kind with Britain.

His comments appear to have struck a blow to David Cameron and the Remain camp, who had hinted at a fresh push to change migration rules into the UK if Britain votes to stay in the EU.

Reacting to the news, former Scottish First Minister Alex Salmond said: "I don’t see that [Mr Juncker’s comments] as a problem.

"I think he is doing no more than speaking the truth.

LBC•GETTY

 I think he is doing no more than speaking the truth

Alex Salmond on Jean-Claude Juncker

"I happen to think the case for Europe is more important than the prime minister's negotiations."

He continued: "We keep getting this stuff about these 'unelected people like Jean-Claude Juncker'.

"All Juncker is effectively the head civil servant.

"He is there to carry out the bidding of the commission."

Mr Salmond then criticised anti-EU campaigners who say the EU's top officials are unknown and unaccountable.



"Who can name the Cabinet Secretary, the most powerful civil servant in the United Kingdom?."

The current Cabinet Secretary is Sir Jeremy Heywood, who has been in the post since January 2012.

Earlier on Thursday, Mr Juncker told reporters in Brussels: "The British policy makers and British voters have to know that there will not be any kind of renegotiation.

"We have concluded a deal with the prime minister, he got the maximum he could receive, we gave the maximum we could give."

"So there will be no renegotiation, not on the agreement we found in February, nor as far as any kind of treaty negotiations are concerned."

Reacting to his comments, Michael Gove, co-chair of the Vote Leave campaign, said: "The Remain campaign has been claiming in recent days that if you vote to stay in the EU then there could be further reform.

"The President of the EU, Jean-Claude Juncker, has made very clear today that will not happen.

"If you vote to stay there is no prospect of getting any reform from the EU ever again. We will never get back control of the £350 million we give to the EU every week."

"We will never get back control of the £350 million we give to the EU every week."

