Pound soars to biggest one-day gain ahead of EU referendum

2016-06-21

GETTY

More than £40billion was added to the value of Britain’s blue chip companies , while sterling rebounded from recent heavy losses to strengthen over 2 per cent against the US dollar to $1.468 after opinion polls suggested a neck-and-neck race. 

The pound also traded 1.9 per cent higher against the euro at 1.297.

The FTSE 100’s 182.91-point rise to 6204 was mirrored by similar 3 per cent gains across leading European share markets, while Japanese and American stock prices also moved sharply higher. 

Oil prices jumped 2 per cent, with Brent crude climbing above the $50-a-barrel barrier. 

Some of the UK’s biggest financial institutions received the biggest confidence boost from investors, with shares in Lloyds Banking Group and Royal Bank of Scotland surging by about 7 per cent. 

Barclays was up 6 per cent. 

GETTY

 Such is the importance of the Brexit referendum to global markets that all other concerns have been cast aside, at least for now

Chris Beauchamp

Chris Beauchamp, senior market analyst at online trading firm IG, said yesterday: “The frenzy of buying that’s been seen across global markets over the past few hours matches the panic selling we witnessed last week.

Investors have rushed back to buy up stocks, currencies and commodities in a similar fashion to the way they abandoned them a few days ago.

“Such is the importance of the Brexit referendum to global markets that all other concerns have been cast aside, at least for now.” 

GETTY

Analysts said there could be more twists and turns ahead of the vote, with Commerzbank currency strategist Ulrich Leuchtmann admitting: “The outcome of the referendum is wide open.” 

Paresh Davdra, co-founder at online foreign exchange service RationalFX, said: “Volatility is as rampant in the pound as at any point this century. 

Days away from this momentous yet disruptive Referendum, the gains in today’s stocks may be losses tomorrow. “What we know for certain is Friday will see massive volatility in global markets and currencies.’’

