Leave or Remain? Find the EU referendum themed food and drink to suit YOU

2016-06-23

GETTY

With the polls tied and the result too close to call it seems half of us will be eating our words come Friday. So, why not have some delicious Brexit themed breakfast to go with it? 

Maybe even a referendum themed beer to wash away the bitter taste of defeat or savour sweet victory with.

PH

1. Remain - 40 FT Brewery - Stronger In Europe

The best place to start is probably the beer. Although the result is expected in the early morning nothing is better for celebrating or drowning sorrows than a beer or three. In one of the major shocks of the referendum campaign a trendy microbrewery operating out of a two shipping containers in Hackney has declared for Remain. But regardless of what side of the debate you are on we can all appreciate a good beer.

GETTY

2. Leave - Shakespeare's Head, J. D. Wetherspoon

Boris Johnson and the Vote Leave gang received a boost when Wetherspoons owner Tim Martin revealed himself as a passionate backer of their fight to get Britain out of the EU. So in the event of a Brexit raise a glass to the UK’s newly won freedom and to one of its most famous sons at the Shakespeare’s Head in Holborn.

YELP

Even though Friday is technically the weekend some people might turn their noses up at the idea of starting the day with a beer. Luckily enough London is not short of non-liquid breakfast options.

1. In the event of an out vote - The Regency Cafe

Britain is now free from the undemocratic grasp of Brussels, time to celebrate with a traditional full-English. And now that our kettles are finally safe from the EU you can even have a cup of tea in peace. The Regency do the simple the things well with a no-frills menu and a proper fry-up a thick sausage, black pudding, bacon and no EU healthy eating guidelines insight.

YELP

2. In the event of an in vote - Opso

We have been brought back from the brink. Osborne and co. warned us that leaving the EU would ruin our pensions and make our houses worthless, night would become day and Nigel Farage would become king. Luckily we all listened to his instruction dutifully and the UK is still in the EU.

So take advantage of your roll as a citizen of a united Europe and feast on a continental breakfast. Where better to source your morning meal from than one of the EU’s great success stories, Greece. Have something healthy like their homemade granola and Greek yogurt. Or for something less healthy enjoy a tsoureki, a flavoured brioche with chocolate spread. 

PH

With a close result expected and the possibility of David Dimbleby adopting an X-Factor-style extra long dramatic pause we could still be in the dark about the country’s future come lunch or even dinner time. If the result is a unknown it might be best to return to deciding things the old fashioned way, with food.

It’s a toss-up - All Star Lanes

The wildly conflicting statements from both sides have confused the electorate so much that it has become clear the only democratic way to decide the referendum is a battle of the burgers. The ‘slider decider’ menu features a blue cheese and brussels pate slider for the Europhiles and a beer-fried onion and black pudding option Europhobes.

So whatever happens to the future of this proud country a least you can get some good grub. Compiled with the help of urban city guide Yelp.

