Brexit: What would happen to UEFA if Britain leaves the EU?

2016-06-22

Getty

The comparison between the historic EU referendum and the Euros came before British voters go to the polls tomorrow and England footballers went to Euro 2016. 

Bulgarian foreign minister Daniel Mitov made the observation about football during a discussion on Britain’s membership of the EU earlier this year.

He said: “A European Union without the UK would be like the UEFA European Championship without England’s national team and Wayne Rooney’s goals.”

Here is a look at what would happen to UEFA if Britain votes to leave the EU in the all-important referendum on June 23. 



Sports immigration lawyer Maria Patsalos, from law firm Mishcon de Reya, reassured to football fans by confirming that England could still play in European Championships. 

Ms Patsalos told Express.co.uk: "Membership in the EU is not relevant to the UEFA position, as the members of UEFA are entirely separate. 

“For example, neither Switzerland and Russia are in the EU, but are still eligible to play in European Championships such as the tournament in France this summer.”

Which stars from your club would not have automatically qualified for work permits in the Premier League last season?

 Membership in the EU is not relevant to the UEFA position, as the members of UEFA are entirely separate.

Sports immigration lawyer Maria Patsalos

Ms Patsalos said the domestic clubs of non-EU members such as Switzerland and Russia are still eligible to play in the Champions League and Europa League. 

She said: “Therefore, England and Premier League clubs would not be prohibited in any way in the event of a Brexit.” 

The reassurance came after Liverpool played in the final of the Europa League and Manchester City reached the semi-finals of the Champions League this year. 

Getty

Professor Raymond Boyle, from the University of Glasgow, described the Euros and the Champions League as two of the most high profile expressions of “shared European cultural identity”. 

But he said: “Neither is dependent on membership of the EU. In short, being out of the EU would have little impact on elite football in the UK.”

Brexit campaigners have rubbished claims that leaving the EU would stop European talent from coming to play in the Premier League. 

BREXIT: WHAT HAPPENS TO FOREIGN FOOTBALLERS?

Express Sport brings you the best pictures from the Europa League final where Sevilla triumphed 3-1 over Jurgen Klopp's Liverpool

UEFA, also known as the Union of European Football Associations, is the governing body for football in Europe. 

Its headquarters are in Switzerland and its influence stretches from Iceland in the north-west to Kazakhstan - none of these three countries are in the EU. 

The sporting authority represents 55 football associations and runs competitions such as the Champions League, the Euros, the Europa League and the Super Cup. 

UEFA was founded in Basel, Switzerland, in 1954 to foster and develop the “unity and solidarity among the European football community”.

WHAT IS THE EU AND WHY WAS IT CREATED?



