Osborne has lost all credibility with his budget threat, says LEO MCKINSTRY

2016-06-16

GETTY

As a host of opinion polls continue to show a significant lead for Brexit, the Remain camp has decided that the public should now be threatened with punishment for daring to challenge the pro-EU establishment. In an extraordinary performance that mixed hysteria with gross irresponsibility, the Chancellor George Osborne warned that if Britain votes to leave, then he will introduce a “Brexit Budget”, featuring massive tax rises and spending cuts. 

Brutal in its scope, this emergency measure will far exceed the austerity programme which Osborne set out in his previous budgets over the past six years. However this was not a serious exercise in fiscal planning but a desperate act of political intimidation. Osborne has blown his credibility to pieces with his shameless abuse of office for the cause of Brussels. 

For months the Remain campaign has issued a barrage of dire warnings about the economic uncertainty generated by Brexit. Yet all those gloomy forecasts have proved hollow, as was again highlighted by yesterday’s employment figures, which showed a record number of people in work and job creation at much higher levels in Britain than anywhere in the eurozone. 

So now, in an astonishing display of contempt for our national interests, Osborne trumpets his suicidal plan to manufacture a financial crisis deliberately. Panicked by the failure of the Remain campaign the ­Chancellor has morphed into a demented punishment freak. His Brexit Budget amounts to sadomasochism on an epic scale, consisting of economic sadism against the British people and masochistic selfloathing for his own country. 

His conduct illustrates once more the utter lack of patriotism and principle among the Remain campaigners. Osborne is meant to be a Conservative but yesterday he sounded like an economically illiterate Left-wing activist or militant trade unionist, screeching about the dangers of future “Tory cuts” if we regain control of our democracy. 

In another indicator of how the Conservative Remainers are now part of an insidious progressive alliance with Brussels and the British Left, Osborne chose to launch his Brexit Budget with none other than Alistair Darling, the former Labour chancellor who presided over the disastrous 2008 crash. In the same vein, David ­Cameron and Jeremy Corbyn spoke in unison at Prime Minister’s Questions yesterday about the EU, the economy and immigration. 

GETTY

It just shows how low ­Cameron has sunk in the wake of his surrender to Brussels that he is now in agreement with a Marxist Republican who believes in open borders and the overthrow of capitalism. But then Cameron is the man who now eagerly shares a Remain platform with London Mayor Sadiq Khan, despite his past accusations of Khan’s links to Islamic extremism. 

The Prime Minister has also campaigned alongside the queen of political correctness Harriet Harman; the hopelessly incoherent Green Party leader Natalie Bennett and the SNP chief Nicola Sturgeon, who wants to see the break-up of the United Kingdom. With polling day so close, the treacherous political establishment is fighting viciously to defend its vested interests. 

The ruling elite cares nothing for the rights of the British people but only for the maintenance of its own power and dogma. As Osborne’s despicable behaviour demonstrates, this sneering political class sees much of the electorate as a dangerous, ill-educated, bigoted mass who should be made to suffer for holding the wrong views. “Has England gone mad?” one typical, patronising, pro-EU commentator asked yesterday. 

But Osborne and his allies are the deluded ones. His entire Brexit Budget initiative is absurd. For a start, our freedom from the Brussels regime will actually boost our prosperity. It is the EU that drives down living standards through mass immigration and pushes up prices through its protectionist policies. Moreover, our Government will have far more cash for our national priorities, like the NHS, when we no longer have to contribute a gross sum of £18billion to Brussels every year.

The real financial black hole in our national finances will arise from our continuing membership. If Britain votes to remain, the EU will not only erode our rebate but will demand a huge increase in annual contributions to pay for the migration crisis, the embrace of Turkey, the continuing eurozone bailouts and the creation of an EU army, border force and special prosecutor.

Any temporary financial shortfall from Brexit, which is unlikely, could be met by reducing the colossal, mismanaged £12billion foreign aid budget instead of whacking up income tax as Osborne proposes. 



On a political level, too, his budget belongs to the realms of fantasy. He knows that Labour would never support such cuts while 65 Tory MPs publicly pledged yesterday to oppose his scheme. So no such financial bill could be passed by the Commons. But, in the event of Brexit, Osborne will not even be in charge at the Treasury.

As with Cameron’s hold on the premiership, he has made his position untenable with his cheerleading for Brussels. 

In the event of British freedom, both men could be gone within weeks. Their deceitful, aggressive campaign has exactly mirrored the bullying culture of Brussels. The British people have seen through such threats in the past. Next week, they have the chance to do so again.

