Julian Assange backs Vote Leave and blasts ‘undemocratic’ European Union

2016-06-20

GETTY

The Wikileaks founder, who has lived in the Ecuadorian embassy in London for four years, gave his support to the Vote Leave camp just days before the EU referendum.

Mr Assange said he “pretty much” believes the UK should vote out on Thursday as he claimed Cameron is “repeatedly” using the EU as “political cover”.

GETTY

He said: “For example, the European Arrest Warrant - we think here in the United Kingdom that you have a right to a fair trial… but in my case, we don't have any of that.

"Many people in the UK have been affected by that. That's a fundamental basis of sovereignty – random officials in the rest of the European Union can suddenly force your police to arrest people."

Mr Assange is wanted in Sweden for sexual assault, a charge he repeatedly denies, and found refuge in the Ecuadorian embassy in London in 2012.

 The EU is bad for the UK because it permits a lack of democratic accountability in this country

Julian Assange

The Wikileaks founder also claimed the EU is undemocratic and it is bad for the UK.

He said: "The UK is bad for the EU, but also the EU is bad for the UK because it permits a lack of democratic accountability in this country by permitting successive governments in this country to simply say ‘oh, we are forced into doing things because of EU legislation' when it is precisely these governments that have been behind the EU legislation in the first place."

His comments come as both Remain and Vote Leave camps made final rallying cries before the crucial vote.

Prime Minister David Cameron with his wife Samantha leave 10 Downing Street for the last time after speaking to the press to visit Buckingham Palace to formally tender his resignation to the Queen on July 13, 2016

The Prime Minister received a grilling on Question Time from audience members over immigration.

The Tory leader was compared to Neville Chamberlain during the show by a fiery Out supporter.

He said: “Mr Cameron, you say your policy that you’ve negotiated with Europe cannot be overruled; it can, so are you really the 21st century Neville Chamberlain waving a piece of paper in the air saying to the public this is what I have, I have this promise where a dictatorship in Europe can overrule it.

GETTY

“Answer the questions yes or no.”

In a bid to defend his position, Mr Cameron said: “The other 27 prime ministers and presidents have agreed it and they know if Britain votes to remain they will implement it.

”And I think, you know it this not some empire or dictatorship. 

“We’re proving through this referendum that if Britain wants to leave this organisation we can. we’re a sovereign country.”

