Union boss brands expanding EU ‘a gigantic experiment at the expense of ordinary workers'

2016-06-21

GETTY

The Unite leader, known as ‘Red Len’, railed against the “sustained pressure on living standards and a systematic attempt to hold down wages” as a result of the enlargement of the bloc into former Communist countries in the last decade.

Mr McCluskey is supporting Britain remaining in the EU on Thursday but said he would “refuse to lecture or to patronise those working people who take a different view”.

In an article for the Guardian, he asked: “Who can be surprised that in so many industrial areas, voting for the status quo is not a popular option?”

In 2004 the Czech Republic, Cyprus, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia joined the EU in the bloc’s largest ever expansion.

Bulgaria and Romania joined three years later, with all 12 new member states now granted access to Brussels’ freedom of movement rules.

The latest set of official figures revealed net EU migration to the UK stood at 184,000 over 12 months, equalling its record high.

Remain campaigners are fearful immigration fears could push many Labour supporters to vote for Brexit this week, despite the party’s backing for staying in the EU.



 Who can be surprised that in so many industrial areas, voting for the status quo is not a popular option?

Len McCluskey

Mr McCluskey wrote: “Some pundits and commentators, like explorers returning from a visit to the deep unknown, are stunned to find that immigration has become an issue among Labour voters.

“I am not in the least surprised. In the past 10 years there has been a gigantic experiment at the expense of ordinary workers.

“Countries with vast historical differences in wage rates and living standards have been brought together in a common labour market.

“The result has been sustained pressure on living standards and a systematic attempt to hold down wages and cut the costs of social provision for working people.

“That is why, for trade unions, control of the labour supply in an industry or across society has always been the core of our mission, to ensure that workers get a fair share of the wealth they create.”

But the union chief argued “pulling up the drawbridge against the rest of Europe is the wrong answer” and a Brexit vote “will not stop the supply of cheap labour to Britain”.

Mr McCluskey said workers’ rights can “best be defended and extended by working in unity across borders, rather than each isolated in our own country”.

At the weekend, Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn admitted the EU’s fundamental principle of freedom of movement means there can be no upper limit on the number of people coming into the UK.

