Have I Got News For You boss wants David Cameron on next series following Brexit result

2016-06-24

GETTY

The Prime Minister announced earlier today that he would be stepping down as leader of the country in the aftermath of the EU Referendum results, after which a slew of media figures weighed in on the matter, from broadcasters, to polital correspondents, authors and TV producers.

Amongst these was Jimmy Mulville, the co-founder of Hat Trick Productions and one of the brains behind Have I Got News For You.

Mulville took to Twitter posting: "Cameron out - Boris in. Boris' strategy over the last few years has been faultless. Any student of Roman history will recognise this."

This was sharply met with a reply from screenwriter and political memoirist John O'Farrell who pointed out that "His rise to popularity began with HIGNFY".

BBC

Maybe we can have Cameron on next series. We get them on the way up and on the way down. https://t.co/hXcU7dyEfl

GETTY

 Maybe we can have Cameron on next series. We get them on the way up and on the way down

Jimmy Mulville

Boris Johnson has indeed appeared on Have I Got News For You, twice as a panelist and four times as a guest host.

In response to O'Farrell's tweet, Mulville suggested David Cameron come onto his show on the next series, now that he is "on the way down". The producer wrote: "Maybe we can have Cameron on next series. We get them on the way up and on the way down."

In an article published by GQ magazine last september, Johnson was listed as one of the best hosts of the series. The same article also stated that "Without HIGNFY, Boris Johnson probably wouldn't have been selected as the Conservative Mayoral candidate".

With regards to the Brexit result, Mulville declared his stance on the matter, saying: "Be careful what you wish for. When the Brexiteers sober up they'll see what a huge mistake they made."

GETTY

Can you imagine a country where you have to rely totally on British builders?

Brexit: What to expect next

Known for his specialisms in satirical political television, Mulville weighed in on the issue with regards to the state of the economy and the effect it will have on entertainment industries.

"200 billion wiped off shares in British companies. Sterling plummets. Well done Bexit. #becarefulwhatyouwishfor," he posted.

Back to his satirical ways, Mulville later tweeted: "Boris attacked leaving his house and called scum and no, not by his wife this time."

