US politicians chastise 'misguided' Barack Obama for meddling in Britain's EU referendum

2016-06-20

GETTY

As many as 11 congressmen attacked the President’s decision to “pressure” the UK into backing the Remain campaign – calling the decision “misguided”.

Obama urged Britain to stay in the European Union alongside David Cameron on a trip to London in April.

But Republican politicians have chastised the world leader’s appearance, which was also criticised by British Brexit campaigners.

The politicians behind the letter include the chairman of the armed services committee and the chairman of the intelligence committee.

GETTY

The congressmen wrote: “Regardless of the outcome of the referendum, citizens of the United Kingdom should know that we will continue to regard our relationship with the United Kingdom as a central factor in the foreign, security, and trading policies of the United States.

“The United States, as a nation founded on the sovereign and democratic voice of the American people, must respect the sovereignty of other democratic peoples, and their inalienable right to determine their own destiny.

“Any interference in their decision can only harm our relationship.”

Chris Grayling, the Conservative Leader of the Commons, said: "The reality is that very many of Britain’s friends in Washington are relaxed about what we decide on Thursday and they want to make sure the special relationship remains strong whether we leave or remain in the EU.

GETTY

Michelle Obama and the Queen

“What’s more President Obama’s comment that Britain would be back of the queue for future agreements is thought to be ridiculous by many of our friends and allies on Capitol Hill."

It comes after the Tory Brexiteer visited the US to blast Obama’s interference in the run up to the referendum.

At the time Mr Grayling claimed Obama’s intervention was the equivalent of asking American voters to accept being ruled by a parliament in Panama, a supreme court in Venezuela, merging their military into an "army of the Americas" and allowing "every Mexican… the freedom to move to New York City if they choose".

GETTY

He added: “The view from Washington isn't really the best way of judging what is right and wrong for the United Kingdom, and I think President Obama was wrong to insert himself into the debate in this way.

"In the same way that the United Kingdom should respect the big decisions taken in the US, so the verdict on the future of the United Kingdom must be one for the people of the UK alone.”

