Smug German paper makes £10k bet on Remain saying Britain WILL vote to stay

2016-06-22

GETTY 

A reporter from Bild newspaper joined in on a great British tradition and made his wager at a betting shop in London.

The €12,800 (£10,000) vote of confidence for Remain may come as a surprise to critics as previous interventions by German officials have been fuelled by desperate bouts of scaremongering and a clear fear Britain will cut ties with Brussels.

The newspaper is quoted as saying: “We believe: the English, Northern Irish, Scottish and Welsh are, due to their long standing democratic culture, their critical minds, liberalism, their economic performance, their creativity and also because of their sense of humour, are a vital part of the EU.

“We say cheers to that.”

GETTY 

 Bild believes in Great Britain, Bild believes in the common sense and rationality of the British

Reporter Peter Tiede

In what appears to be a desperate attempt to persuade us to Remain, reporters from the German newspaper attempted to massage the country's ego by complimenting the nation’s “common sense and rationality”.

Bild reporter Phillip Sandmann said the bet meant “we believe in Britain and also want them to stay in the EU”.

Reporter Peter Tiede added: “You can call us crazy but we believe in the British and have put £10,000 on a remain vote, that they will vote to stay and will vote against a separation from the continent. 

“Bild believes in Great Britain, Bild believes in the common sense and rationality of the British.”

It comes after Alexander Lambsdorff MEP claimed Brussels would survive without Britain because it was never an integral part of the EU in the first place.

The

GETTY 

Germany's @BILD bets £10k on Remain to win #EUref as want UK to stay. Will spend winnings on free drinksvia @Tanit pic.twitter.com/a7DzTqCrwk

GETTY 

However he ruled Brussels would crumble if France and European powerhouse Germany decided to leave.

Chancellor Angela Merkel waded into the debate headfirst last month warning Britain it “won’t get a good deal” if it backs Brexit.

