Seething Chuka Umunna SLAMS fellow Labour MPs for not campaigning hard enough for Remain

2016-06-24

Mr Umunna was one of the most prominent Labour figures arguing for Britain to remain in the UK – in stark comparison to the 'lukewarm' efforts of Jeremy Corbyn and other MPs.

A clearly disappointed and frustrated Mr Umunna told LBC he had "put in every ounce of energy he could possibly find into the campaign".

When asked if he could say the same for some of his colleagues, he simply said no.

He declined to give any specific names but Mr Corbyn and his shadow chancellor John McDonnell have both been accused of failing to properly support the Remain campaign.

GETTY•LBC

The turmoil in Labour looks set to grow following a catastrophic night for the Remain campaign – where traditional Labour strongholds swung massively for Leave.

Mr Umunna also lashed out at Labour MP and Brexit backer Kate Hoey after she said voters in the London borough of Lambeth had only voted for Remain because they were wealthy metropolitan individuals who were "having a ball".

"The suggestion that Lambeth, which both she and I represent, voted to Remain because they are all metropolitan well-off people flies in the face of the reality of life for so many people in both of our constituencies," he said.

"40% of children growing up in inner-London boroughs like Lambeth are living in absolute poverty.

"If you go on to any of our estates – whether in my constituency in Streatham, which takes in part of Brixton and Vauxhall – they did vote in great numbers for us to stay in the European Union."

"If you go on to any of our estates - whether in my constituency in Streatham, which takes in part of Brixton and Vauxhall - they did vote in great numbers for us to stay in the European Union.

"But no, life is not a ball for many people in our constituencies.

"And to suggest that and to put that forward as a reason why people were voting for us to stay in the European Union are wrong." 

Following the decision of the major broadcasters to call the referendum for Leave, calls for Mr Corbyn to resign have already begun to be made.

