David Cameron knew his manifesto migration pledge was unachievable, says Ross Clark

2016-06-22

GETTY

But none stands out so brazenly as the promise David Cameron has made repeatedly over the past few years, including in the 2015 Conservative manifesto, to deliver “annual net migration in the tens of thousands, not the hundreds of thousands”.

So long as citizens of other member states enjoy the right to travel to any other member state to look for work setting a target for net migration to Britain is meaningless.

As if it was not already obvious that a Conservative government had no prospect of realising this target so long as Britain remains in the EU, the Prime Minister’s former director of strategy, Steve Hilton, confirmed yesterday that David Cameron was warned by his advisers that it simply was not credible.

Sure enough, the figure for net migration to Britain for 2015 was 333,000, more than three times the Government’s promise.

Britain is powerless to change the principle of free movement enshrined in the EU’s Treaty of Rome, Cameron was reminded during his renegotiations.



The Government’s promise has become even more infamous than Labour’s estimate that only 13,000 eastern Europeans would take advantage of the right to look for work in Britain in the first year after the accession of former Soviet bloc countries to the EU in 2004.

In the event, half a million turned up. But at least the Blair government didn’t turn their 13,000 figure into a manifesto promise.

It becomes a much more serious issue when a party stands for office on promises which it knows it cannot meet.



Angry protesters clash with police as the attempt to storm St Pancras Eurostar terminal

If the Conservatives were an investment fund and its manifesto a prospectus promising returns that it knew would be impossible to deliver it would be facing prosecution.

David Cameron tries to explain his failure to reach his migration target by saying that Britain’s economy has been so much stronger than other EU countries and that it has therefore proved an unexpectedly strong magnet for job-seeking foreigners.

That is a feeble excuse. It was clear well before ain is meaningless.



GETTY

The Government’s promise has become even more infamous than Labour’s estimate that only 13,000 eastern Europeans would take advantage of the right to look for work in Britain in the first year after the accession of former Soviet bloc countries to the EU in 2004.

In the event, half a million turned up. B ut at least the Blair government didn’t turn their 13,000 figure into a manifesto promise. It becomes a much more serious issue when a party stands for office on promises which it knows it cannot meet.

If the Conservatives were an investment fund and its manifesto a prospectus promising returns that it knew would be impossible to deliver it would be facing prosecution.

David Cameron tries to explain his failure to reach his migration target by saying that Britain’s economy has been so much stronger than other EU countries and that it has therefore proved an unexpectedly strong magnet for job-seeking foreigners.

That is a feeble excuse. It was clear well before last year’s manifesto was written that the labour markets in many other EU countries are in a dire state – Spain has an unemployment rate of 21 per cent.

In any case, if Cameron is trying to tell us that migrants are coming here because the rest of the EU is an economic basket case, why is he simultaneously trying to convince us that Britain would hurt economically if we left the EU?

GETTY

Surely, if the rest of Europe is performing so poorly it is a good reason for decoupling our economy from moribund Europe and seeking investment and trading opportunities elsewhere in the world where economic growth is so much stronger. Cameron’s excuse simply doesn’t stand up.

It is clear that he sanctioned the promise to reduce net migration to a few tens of thousands a year in the hope that it would attract a lot of votes from Ukip yet knowing that it could not be delivered.

Maybe he was counting on not winning a majority, in which case the promise could be quietly dropped in a coalition agreement, or maybe he is so convinced by his ability to explain his way out of trouble that thought, he could get away with saying whatever he liked.

The irony is that in recent days David Cameron has been trying to make honesty the basis of his campaigning in the EU referendum.

At the weekend he accused the Leave campaign of peddling three “untruths” – that Turkey is about to join the EU, that £350million a week goes to the EU and that there is going to be a European army.

“If people, after serious thought and consideration, want to leave [the EU],” he said, “of course we must leave. But to leave based on three things that are not true would be a pretty desperate outcome.”

Many might argue that the Conservatives’ victory in last year’s general election was the one based on something that was not true – the idea that net migration could be reduced to a few tens of thousands while we remained members of the EU. That is a far bigger porky than any that have come from the Leave campaign.

How can David Cameron claim it is a lie to say that Turkey is on course to join the EU when his Government has been supporting Turkey’s case for membership?

He himself told the Turks in 2010 that he wanted to “pave the road from Ankara to Brussels”.

Was he lying then or is he lying now?

David Cameron has got himself into the position he is in because he has never grown out of the PR man he was before he was elected as an MP. He is not a political thinker in the way that Michael Gove or Steve Hilton are. It is no accident that no one ever uses the term “Cameronism” in the way that they used “Thatcherism” or “Blairism”.



GETTY

He has always drawn his political ideas from others while putting them together into a marketable package.

The whole EU referendum was, to him, a PR stunt. He hoped that he could win over Ukip voters and silence Eurosceptics in his party by promising a renegotiation of Britain’s terms of membership of the EU followed by the stamp of approval by the British people.

Trouble is, he miscalculated that PR is a little more difficult in government than it was in the TV station where he used to work. His stunt has backfired on him horribly.

