Muslim Tory MEP ‘received abusive social media messages calling him a f****** immigrant’

2016-06-21

SWNS•GETTY

A 55-year-old man has been arrested following the alleged abuse sent to Tory MEP Sajjad Karim who fears for the safety of his wife and 13-year-old daughter.

The Lancashire-born MEP of 12 years will now no longer take part on EU referendum debates because of the alleged claims.

The arrest came just hours after the murder of Labour MP Jo Cox in Birstall, West Yorkshire, last Friday.

Remain campaigner Karim, 45, called for tighter security for politicians following the tragic death of Mrs Cox and accused Brexit supporters of stirring up hatred.

This was met by criticism from Ukip leader Nigel Farage who said: “I’m sure Mr Cameron will deal with him”.

The British-Pakistani politician then allegedly received abusive messages after responding to Mr Farage via Twitter.

SWNS

One message reads: “Don't talk out of your a***, the only reason you want in is because you'll lose money... and threatening Mr Nigel Farage will get YOU enemies you p****... We know where to come if anything happens to him... I'll be the first to knock on your door you mussie p****.”

Another said: “Someone should deal with you ya f****** immigrant.”

Mr Karim said: “I worried for my safety immediately. We have had a situation in the past where we had quite a number, 30 or so, far-Right extremists turn up outside my home address carrying placards.



“They made a video of the whole thing and put my address on the internet, encouraging others to do what they had done.

“Our safety at that address was compromised and we no longer live there. So yes, the police are taking this very seriously indeed.”

The MEP claimed politicians receive abuse on social media “all the time”.

 We get social media posts all the time and there is lots of racism and people targeting me for my religion

Sajjad Karim

He added: “We get social media posts all the time and there is lots of racism and people targeting me for my religion, but this is particularly bad. I have been in the UK now campaigning for the Remain side in the EU referendum for a number of weeks.

“What I have been sensing, mainly around the North-West, is that a real tension has emerged during debates and campaigning events.

“Leave campaigners are packing them up and not allowing debate to take place but just shutting people down.

SWNS

SWNS

“I am hearing things like, “These immigrants, these foreigners are coming over here and taking our jobs,” which I haven't heard since the early eighties.”

A North Yorkshire Police spokesman said: “A 55-year-old Harrogate man was arrested on Friday in connection with social media messages sent to an MEP. He has been released on bail pending further enquiries.”

