Man who compared Turkish leader Erdogan to Lord of the Rings character Gollum spared jail

2016-06-23

AFP

And today the tinpot leader confirmed in his country there really is one king to rule them all, after hounding a man through the courts for comparing him to Lord of the Rings character Gollum. 

Rifat Cetin was only narrowly spared jail and has been stripped of his parental rights after remarking on social media of the likeness between despot Erdogan and the “small, slimy creature” from the blockbuster films. 

He is just the latest of some 1,800 people including cartoonists and a former Miss Turkey to be convicted of insulting the authoritarian leader under draconian laws he brought in to "protect" his office. 

The case provides further evidence of Turkey’s alarming lurch towards dictatorship under Erdogan at a time when the country’s impending membership of the European Union is being accelerated. 

YouTube

AFP

Brussels officials are set to meet diplomats from Ankara after today’s Brexit referendum to discuss the next phase in the plan to bring Turkey into the EU club within the next few decades. 

A judge handed Cetin a one year jail sentence, suspended for five years and stripped him of his parental custody rights, according to the Hurriyet newspaper. 

The maximum jail term for insulting Erdogan is four years, and he has now been warned he will go to jail if he commits another "crime". 

The court was told that Cetin posted an image on Facebook in 2014 in which he combined three pictures of Erdogan with the Gollum character, immortalised in J.R.R Tolkien’s classic trilogy and played by Andy Serkis in the Hollywood films. 

The defendant told another newspaper, daily BirGun, he planned to appeal the verdict given that Erdogan was not president, but prime minister, at the time the image was posted.

Gollum appears in Tolkien's tale "The Hobbit" and his "Lord of the Rings" trilogy, which have been turned into blockbuster movies.

The creature is portrayed as both an antagonist of Tolkien's heroes, the hobbits Bilbo and Frodo Baggins, and a victim of the most powerful of the trilogy's eponymous rings, which has twisted his mind and body.

Doctor Bilgin Ciftci is being tried for sharing an identically juxtaposed Facebook picture, his lawyer said in December.

