Johnson and Gove ramp up pressure on Cameron over Turkey’s future in EU

2016-06-16

GETTY

The Tory Leave campaigners also demanded the Prime Minister to be “clear” about Government policy on free movement within the 28-country bloc after his most senior Cabinet ministers appeared to disagree over reform. 

Chancellor George Osborne said there were no plans for further change to the rules but Home Secretary Theresa May said the policy should be altered.

Ms May said: "There are some changes coming up in free movement rules, to make it easier for us to deal with illegal immigrants, and I think again, as I've said, that we should look at further reform in the future.” 

But her Tory colleague Mr Osborne denied that there were any plans to change free movement, saying: “The short answer is no, because we have a plan and the plan is to restrict the welfare that people get when they come to this country so you don't get out until you put in.

“That is the plan we will implement, with the agreement of our partners.

“It is part of a multi-pronged attack to deal with people's concerns about immigration, controlling it from outside the EU, dealing with abuses of free movement, also crucially seeing the European economies now growing actually at roughly the same rate as the British economy.

GETTY

 The short answer is no, because we have a plan

George Osborne

“I think all of those things will help address those concerns.”

In a letter to the Prime Minister, Mr Gove and Mr Johnson called for his Cabinet to “confirm whether it is Government policy not to seek any further reforms of EU 'free movement' laws and regulations?".

The Brexit campaigners said claims Britain will veto Turkish EU membership are “obviously artificial” given the Government’s commitment to accession at the “earliest possible opportunity”. 

GETTY

The Leave campaign frontmen said failing to guarantee that the UK will block membership and stop the extension of visa-free travel to Turkey will will leave voters to take the "reasonable conclusion that the only way to avoid having common borders" with the nation is by voting to quit the EU.

The letter by Brexit supporters said it is expected “formal talks” over Turkey’s future could begin as early as June 24 - the day of the EU referendum result. 

WHICH COUNTRIES ARE WAITING TO JOIN THE EU?

It said: "Despite the rapidly accelerating pace of accession negotiations, In campaigners maintain that Turkey 'is not an issue in this referendum and it shouldn't be'. 

“Others assert that the UK has 'a veto' on Turkish accession. This claim is obviously artificial given the Government's commitment to Turkish accession at the earliest possible opportunity. 

GETTY

“They also insist that this is the public's last opportunity to have a say on Europe in our lifetimes.”

Mr Cameron has previously insisted that Turkey's failure to meet the terms of accession means its membership is unlikely to be finalised until the year 3000.

MAPPED: THE EXPANDING EMPIRE OF THE EU

