Scots vote to stay in the EU COLLAPSES: Support for Remain wanes north of the border

2016-06-16

GETTY

The new Ipsos Mori survey for STV shows 53 per cent want to stay in the bloc compared to 32 per cent for Brexit. 

But backing for Brussels has fallen by 13 points from 66 per cent over the last two months with the ultimate result on a knife edge. 

Anti-EU campaigners seized on the findings saying they showed the Remain camp's Project Fear was backfiring. 

It came after SNP veteran Jim Sillars attacked Nicola Sturgeon for scaremongering in her bid to secure an "in" vote next Thursday. 

PA/WIRE

The First Minister yesterday claimed Brexit would leave Scots at the mercy of a Right-wing Tory government as Leave leaders seized power from David Cameron. 

She also suggested Scotland would be in the "firing line" as workers' rights and public spending were slashed. 

But speaking at Leave.Eu event in Edinburgh Mr Sillars, former deputy leader of the SNP, said: "I deeply regret that Nicola seems to have resorted to the tactic which she previously deplored and in doing so has fallen from her own high standards. 

"She has deployed the whiplash of fear to drive people to vote for Remain by implying that Brexit will bring a reformed Tory government to power which would destroy workers' rights." 

Mr Sillars argued there was no chance a future government would make changes to holiday, or maternity and paternity pay. 





 I don't see any down side for Scotland of Brexit

Jim Sillars

"It would be suicide for any Westminster government to try to roll them back," he said. 

And despite Chancellor George Osborne's threat of an emergency Brexit Budget of cuts and tax rises, Mr Sillars insisted there was a future outside the EU. 

He said: "I don't see any down side for Scotland of Brexit. Or for the UK. I cannot see any downside of Brexit." 

Polls have consistently shown a majority of Scots want to stay in Europe. 

The latest survey of 1,000 adults found support for Brexit had grown from 29 per cent in April. 

When undecided voters are excluded, 64 per cent back Remain and 36 per cent want to Leave. 

Scottish Vote Leave director Tom Harris said: "This poll shows that David Cameron's scare strategy isn't working in Scotland. 

GETTY

"The Scottish political class have taken Scottish voters for granted in this referendum, we're confident that our positive vision for a stronger Scotland outside the EU will shock the political elite on polling day." 

But a spokesman for Scotland Stronger In Europe said: "The only way to keep the gains of being in Europe - such as the jobs generated by the single market, vital protections for working people and a stronger economy to support quality public services - is to vote Remain. Brexit puts all that at risk." 

Meanwhile, Deputy First Minster John Swinney has branded promises of more powers for Holyrood with a Leave vote a "Tory con-trick". 



GETTY

Brexit campaigners say Scottish ministers could gain control over agriculture, fisheries, and even aspects of immigration. 

But Mr Swinney said: "Leaving the EU does not mean extra powers would be transferred to the Scottish Parliament - the powers would go straight back from Brussels to Westminster, who would have absolutely no obligation to devolve anything." 

The EU referendum campaign will move up a gear today with rival rallies. Former Lib Dem leader Nick Clegg and Scottish Labour chief Kezia Dugdale will be among those making the pro-EU case in Edinburgh. 

Meanwhile, the German-born Labour MP Gisela Stuart is to address a Vote Leave event in Glasgow. 

