Brexit: How will it REALLY affect what we watch on TV?

2016-06-24

GETTY • REUTERS

Before the Referendum results were tallied overnight, 59 per cent of producers, broadcasters and distributors said Brexit would be bad for their business, according to a survey conducted by Media Business Insight (MBI).

In addition, a poll conducted with the TV producers' association (Pact) prior to the vote revealed that only 15 per cent of producers planned to support Brexit.

But why?

“I have read that co-productions would be a big casualty of Brexit," Ben Richards, writer of Sky Atlantic's The Tunnel, has said to RadioTimes.com. "It’s something to do with the financing of it. It would be much harder to get the co-operation between production companies in different countries. I’m not an expert but financially it would be more complicated.”

GETTY

 I have read that co-productions would be a big casualty of Brexit

Ben Richards, The Tunnel writer

This has sent fans of shows such as fantasy drama Game Of Thrones into a spin, given that much of that particular series is shot in Northern Ireland and is thought to be supported by the European Regional Development Fund. However, worry over this has today been quashed by broadcaster HBO, who have revealed that Game of Thrones does not require support from that particular money pot.

Other series could be impacted, nonetheless.

British TV shows and formats are worth around £376m a year to European broadcasters, and many were worried that this would drop if the country voted to break ties with Brussels.

Another of the funds, the EU’s Media Desk, has provided hundreds of thousands of pounds for series including BBC4’s Hinterland, BBC2 documentary Inside Obama’s White House and Film Four's Amy Winehouse biopic, Amy.

HBO

The world reacts to Britain's EU Referendum result

But while a slew of pre-vote theories from industry insiders declared a Brexit result to be "a disaster", culture secretary John Whittingdale was one of the leading advocates for Vote Leave.

With the results now in, ITV chief executive Adam Crozier has reassured his staff, after shares in the organisation fell by almost 20 per cent this morning.

He wrote to them insisting that ITV's strategy "remains unchanged” despite the vote and said that the company will continue to “create and broadcast great programmes and sell them around the world".

It is thought that after the initial hysteria of change dies down, plans going forward will become a little more clear cut.





