Calm before the storm: Stock markets braced for Friday mayhem

2016-06-23

GETTY

As voting got underway on Thursday, global stock markets were skittish with traders nervously awaiting the outcome.

Thin volumes of trading helped push Britain's FTSE 100 up by around 1.4 per cent.

Bankers are now preparing to work through tonight, while stockbrokers and financial dealers have drafted in extra staff to deal with a torrent of activity expected on Friday.

The Bank of England is also poised to act amid fears markets could even buckle under the frenzy.

The pound is particularly vulnerable to sharp changes in value as the result becomes apparent early Friday morning.

Sterling has increased in recent days to reach a six-month high against the dollar, and has also edged up against the euro.

GETTY

Billionaire investor George Soros recently said the value of the pound could fall by as much as 15 percent if Britain votes for an exit from the EU.

A number of foreign exchange bureaus have now said they will close on Thursday and Friday amid expectations of huge volatility, which means they may not be able to guarantee customer money.

Yesterday foreign exchange firms reported a huge rush in Britons changing pounds for euros and dollars.

Investors eyes will also be turned to gold prices, which is traditional safe haven asset, as well as stock market activity.

Most investors having cast their bets about which way the vote will go and are now awaiting the result.

The London Stock Exchange

"The FTSE is sitting pretty at that two and a half week high, the UK index showing precious little interest in moving from this level.

"The pound, on the other hand, is being a bit more adventurous, rising half a percent against the dollar and 0.3 per cent against the euro, once again holding strong at its effective 2016 highs."

Many financial firms and institutional investors appear to be expecting a remain and could panic-sell stocks if they wake up Friday morning and find they are wrong. 

Smaller investors and savers have now been urged to hold their nerve and keep long-term goals in mind no matter which way the market goes.

Russ Mould, investment director at platform AJ Bell, said: "Market volatility driven by sentiment rather than company fundamentals is normally short-term and people should not panic or get over excited.

"In the end it is profit and growth that drives company valuations over the long term and people should not lose sight of that when making decisions about their portfolios."

