Corbyn's last walk from shadow cabinet? Labour MPs table vote of no confidence in leader

2016-06-24

LNP

The veteran left-winger's fellow party members called for the beleaguered Labour leader to stand down over his “ambivalent” referendum campaign. 

Margaret Hodge and Ann Coffey confirmed the motion of no confidence in a letter to the chairman of the Parliamentary Labour Party.

They have requested Corbyn's tenure be debated at a meeting of party chiefs on Monday.

His fate could then be decided in a secret ballot of MPs on Tuesday evening.



Margaret Hodge [GETTY]

While the motion carries no constitutional force to press for his resignation, it suggests pressure is growing for him to step aside after what critics say has been a lacklustre campaign to keep Britain in the Brussels bloc.

The leadership crisis has gripped the Labour Party ever since Corbyn swept to a landslide victory in May, 2015.

Fellow Labour MP Angela Smith said earlier: "Jeremy Corbyn has got to take responsibility. He should consider his position. He's shown insufficient leadership."

LNP

Britain's opposition Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn speaks at an anti-racism rally in London

Ann Coffey [GETTY]

Corbyn has faced criticism for his unenthusiastic Remain campaign, with many commentators branding him a “reluctant remainer”.

With Britain deciding to Leave in the historic EU referendum, Labour figures fear Corbyn’s inactive campaign could have handed victory to the Brexit camp.

Liberal Democrats leader Tim Farron said: “This self-inflicted wound will be Cameron’s legacy. This is his failing. 

“And when the call went out to Jeremy Corbyn, he refused to answer. Their self-interested political maneuvering has taken our country to the brink, and we are toppling over the edge.”

Former Labour minister Ian Lucas warned the party needs a "big change in its approach".

He tweeted: "Very pleased Referendum campaign over. Whatever the result, Labour needs a big change in its approach."

PA

 I’m afraid we'll probably find they will not come back to us after the way the leadership have fought this campaign of staying in

Kate Hoey

Key Vote Leave figurehead and former Labour minister Kate Hoey, who allied herself with Tories Boris Johnson and Michael Gove during the campaign trail, claims her party has permanently lost voters as a result of Labour's pro-EU stance.

She said: “We will find thousands and thousands of Labour supporters abandoning the Labour view on this because we've known for a long time, being out there, that the Labour Party view on this is out of step with Labour supporters and ex-Labour supporters.

“I’m afraid we'll probably find they will not come back to us after the way the leadership have fought this campaign of staying in.”

GETTY

She said Labour supporters are "fed up of being told they're ignorant, they're racist" when raising concerns about the impact of immigration.

Long-term Corbyn critic Jamie Reed tweeted: "No doubt, tonight, whatever the result, the Labour Party has to change fundamentally."

But Ed Miliband, who has been the subject of consistent speculation that he may join Corbyn's shadow cabinet, defended his party leader, claiming his reluctance reflected the mood of the nation.

Things you didn't know about Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn

Miliband added: "This has been a very Tory campaign in a number of senses.

"Essentially we've seen the sort of Tory Party nervous breakdown that has been gathering steam for 30 years played out over the last three months in a very extreme way and that has inevitably got the attention.

"Jeremy has obviously had a degree of ambivalence but is for Remain.

"I think actually in that sense he's quite close to centre of gravity of the British people.

"If it is Remain I think it will be reluctant Remain and I think in that sense he sort of speaks to at least a bit of where people are on this.”

