How Brussels fat cats spend YOUR money as if it grows on trees

2016-06-20

GETTY

An overwhelming 47,000 people work inside the institution - with one in five EU officials earning more than our own Prime Minister. 

Eurocrats living in the Brussels bubble far removed from the real world enjoy long lunches, long weeks and retail discounts, while EU tax perks ensure bureaucrats earn more than David Cameron. 

EU employees already bulging pay packet is inflated by their special low rate tax rates - which mean they pay less than half the tax a British worker on a similar salary would. 

According to documents leaked ahead of the last European elections two years ago, at least 10,000 EU employees are raking in more than our Prime Minister who gets paid just under £150,000. 

Just 319 of UK government officials earn the same amount. 

On top of an already hefty wage packet, Eurocrats enjoy extra perks including £240 monthly allowances for stay-at-home spouses and a £100-a-month allowances per child. 

GETTY

 10,000 EU employees are raking in more than our Prime Minister

European taxpayers also spend an estimated £80million a year in school fees for EU bureaucrats' children. 

MEPs simply have to sign a register to claim an automatic £240 daily allowance on top of their £80,000 salary. 

And it costs a staggering £150m a year to pack up the vast institution and move house in an EU travelling circus from Brussels to Strasbourg for just four days a month - because the French say so. 

The European Parliament is moved between the Belgian capital and the French city 400 kilometres away every month. 

The cost of maintaining the buildings in Strasbourg costs £50m a year. 

The eye watering sums of money spent on the vanity project is opposed by many MEPs - but will not be stopped because a vote needs all 28 member states to agree. 

GETTY

In another ridiculous vanity project, every EU meeting is translated into the European club's 24 official languages by interpreters who can rake in up to £800 a day. 



A club of 28 European commissioners - one representing each member state - each enjoy a £200,000 basic salary, a team of staff and a fat pension payoff. 

Retirees receive £8,000 a month in "transition payments" for three years after eventually stepping off the EU gravy train. 

