Former Tory leader Michael Howard tells UK to ‘take back its democracy’ and back a Brexit

2016-06-21

BBC

 I think Thursday maybe our last chance to vote for a democratic self-governing country

Lord Michael Howard

Lord Howard dismissed the bureaucratic Brussels club and criticised the European Court of Human Justice during a heated debate with Newsnight presenter Evan Davis.

The Brexit campaigner said: “I think Thursday maybe our last chance to vote for a democratic self-governing country, people do not understand that the European Court of Human Justice now has the power to overrule acts of parliament.”

The Eurosceptic went on to spout out several examples of the European court’s meddling in British laws, including one act passed two years ago which sought to combat terrorism among schoolchildren.

Lord Howard said: “It has already overruled an act of the Scottish parliament, the first act passed by the SNP after it got a majority last year, and an act passed by our Parliament in 2014 which the Home Secretary said was critical to protecting children fighting terrorism and combatting crime is coming before the European Court of Human Justice and they would be perfectly entitled as things stands to overrule it, and strike it out.”



The former Tory leader went on to quote the Queen’s Speech delivered this year and questioned Britain’s sovereignty if voters chose to remain in the 28-member bloc.

He said: “There is a passage in the Queens speech which said the Government pledges to uphold the sovereignty of parliament and the primacy of the House of Commons, those words are not worth the paper they are written on as long as we remain members of the European Union.”

BBC

Lord Howard’s rallying cry comes just days for the crucial vote on Britain’s membership with the EU.

Brexit campaigner Boris Johnson has urged voters to back an EU exit that would “change the whole course of European history”.

The top Tory said the electorate had a once-in-lifetime opportunity to “take back control of this great country’s destiny”.

He called on voters to “believe in ourselves and what Britain can do. You have it in your hands to transform Britain’s current democratic arrangements for the better”.

He said: “You can change the whole course of European history, and if you vote Leave, I believe that change will be overwhelmingly positive.”

The former London mayor said the poll will be “a moment of fundamental decision”.

And he accused the Remain camp of offering “no change, no improvement, no reform”.

