Why YOU should vote Leave: Express guide on main issues to consider for the EU referendum

2016-06-22

GETTY

Vote Leave has fought the referendum campaign with the powerful message: “Take back control!" 

In the end it is sovereignty that is at the heart of the debate. Is Britain run from Westminster and the devolved government in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland with politicians we elect or is run by unelected faceless bureaucrats in Brussels, Strasbourg and Luxembourg. 

Membership of the EU's single market means that all laws passed in Britain can be over ruled by the European Court of Justice (ECJ).



So far 70 cases have been lost in the ECJ by Britain which has gone beyond its economic remit and also prevents Britain from deporting criminals and has even interfered in divorce law. 

The ECJ has ended the principle of democracy where laws are made and passed by the people we elect. 

Worse still is the “gravy train" European Commission which is made up of unelected bureaucrats with 10,000 of them earning more than the British Prime Minister. 

Commissioners have the sole right to recommend new EU laws which affect all countries and are passed by a European Parliament, sitting in both Brussels and Strasbourg. Britain only has 73 out of 751 MEPs and in the UK election in 2014 only 35.6 per cent of eligible voters bothered to turnout to elect them. 

The Commission under President Jean-Claude Junker has an obsession with centralising power more in the EU and undermining national governments including creating an EU army and taking control of pensions. It wants to eventually force Britain to join the disastrous euro. 

GETTY

Mr Junker and four other EU Presidents have come up with the “Five Presidents Report" to complete the centralised control of the EU. 

On many occasions the British Government cannot veto major changes because they are passed by qualified majority voting in the Council of Europe. 

This will be the case with the proposed trade deal with the US which is likely to force the UK to privatise the NHS. 

However, the most sinister anti-democratic part of the EU is its lack of respect for democratically elected governments if it needs to protect failed EU projects like the euro. 

In Greece and Italy elected governments were forced out of office by the EU to save the euro. 

GETTY

When he was elected as Prime Minister in 2010 and then again in 2015 David Cameron pledged to the British people that he would get immigration down to the tens of thousands. 

He has failed to keep his promise and instead net migration into the country has spiralled out of control. 

The last Office of National Statistics figures revealed that net migration to the UK was 333,000 with 184,000 from the EU in the year to December.



On the current projection the UK population will hit a massive 80 million in just 30 years time with pressure on the NHS, schools, housing and other public services already at an intolerable level. 

Tellingly, Lord Rose, the former chief executive of M&S who is in charge of the Remain campaign, admitted that having unfetter immigration holds down wages. 

Mr Cameron's so called emergency brake in his EU renegotiation of withdrawing benefits when immigration reaches a certain level has been derided and does nothing to tackle unfetter free movement of the 508 million people in the EU. 

Vote Leave have won a lot of support by arguing that he only way to take back control and reduce numbers is to get out of the EU. 

The problem will only get worse if Turkey, Serbia and Bosnia are given EU membership. Turkey alone has 75 million people and while Mr Cameron claims its membership is decades away he has provided £1.9 billion to accelerate the process. 

GETTY

The EU poses a threat to important parts of the British way of life on a number of levels. 

During the campaign the Daily Express revealed secret plans in the EU to create a “social union" which will be unleashed when the referendum is over. 

This will see pensions, the minimum wage and benefits all come under control of unelected, unaccountable officials in Brussels and could also include health and education services as well. 

Already, Brussels red tape is threatening to cost the UK pensions industry up to £500 billion wiping vast amounts of people's retirement savings.



Unfetter immigration from the EU also means that British public services like schools and GPs are overwhelmed while vital funding is being lost with £10 billion a year going to Brussels' coffers. 

By 2030, according to new research, the UK will have to find 261,000 extra school places for children from the EU at a cost of £29 billion. 

But the most sinister threat comes from the planned secretive EU/ US trade deal known as the transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP). 

A leak of the TTIP papers by Greenpeace showed that it will force Britain to privatise and sell off its public services including the NHS and, according to one major expert, the state pension.

BBC

Throughout the campaign Remain supporters have claimed that the UK's defence and security relies on cooperation with the EU and the country will be left alone and exposed if voters back Brexit. 

David Cameron went as far as to claim that Brexit will lead to World War 3 in possibly the lowest moment in his Project Fear campaign. 

However, a long list of retired senior commanders have dismissed this assertion and have made it clear that it is the EU which is posing a major security threat.



The concerns were so great that former defence chief Lord Guthrie switched sides to the Leave campaign. 

Today the Daily Express can reveal ten new senior military names who support Brexit. 

They are: Major-General Robin Grist, Brigadier P.P. Rawlins, Captain Philip Stonor, Colonel Steve Davies, Colonel Ronnie Bradford, Colonel Alan Brown, Colonel Jonathan Campbell-James, Colonel Christopher Hendy, Group Captain Eric King, Group Captain John O'Sullivan, Group Captain Michael Smith and Group Captain Graham Thwaites. 

In a Veterans for Britain letter they say: “It is clear to us that the EU is determined to create its own permanent military force. 

Those who argue that this will never happen underestimate the deviousness of the EU elite who have shown repeatedly a ruthless determination to achieve their aims by stealth. 

The Express revealed that the UK has already signed up to this in the Lisbon Treaty and cannot escape the plans if there is a vote to Remain. 

Pros and cons of Brexit

Veterans for Britain has pointed out that Nato provides military security while the Five Eyes agreement comprising Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States is the basis of intelligence security. 

None of this relies on the EU. 

Instead the attacks in Paris and Brussels reveal that the security agencies in the EU countries are weak and need Britain more than the UK needs them. 

There is no suggestion that cooperation would end with a Brexit. 

Added to this German Chancellor Angela Merkel's decision to open the doors to thousands of refugees has potentially allowed Jihadi terrorists to infiltrate the EU and wander free with the Schenghen zone. 

The problem has been made worse with the deal for visa free access from Turkey which means that the UK and EU now in effect have a border with Syria. 

GETTY

The Remain campaign has made the economy and trade its biggest campaign issue with a series of scare stories about economic Armageddon which would be inflicted on Britain with a Brexit. 

The Project Fear tactics included wheeling out support from economists who had previously called on the UK to join the Euro, the EU funded Institute for Fiscal Studies, doom laden Treasury reports and threats from the International Monetary Fund headed by the former French finance minister Christine Lagarde. 

The low points was a threat by George Osborne to hold an emergency budget and US President Barack Obama claiming Britain would be at “the back of the queue" for a trade deal.

Various EU figures - including Commission President Jean-Claude Junker - have warned of tariffs if Britain leaves. 



However, the truth is rather different. Vote Leave has pointed out that the EU with its 28 members has struggled to make economic deals because of the difficulty in getting common agreements. 

After a decade the deal with America is still not near to being agreed and while Switzerland has a deal with China the EU has failed. 

If Britain is freed from Brussels rule it will be able to have individual trade deals with the fastest growing economies around the world with 80 per cent of the world market outside Europe. 

It has also been pointed out that Britain imports £24 billion more from the EU than it exports to Europe. 

Daily Express covers

If the EU tried to make life difficult Germany could lose its biggest car export market and French wine and cheese manufacturers along with a host of other producers across the EU would be faced with disaster. 

The worst possible outcome is a World Trade Organisation default position which has minimal tariffs and would make Britain better off when you take away its £10 billion EU contribution. 

But there is also huge uncertainty if the UK remains in the EU with the euro zone teetering on the brink of collapse. 

If, as the UK's biggest investor Jim Mellon has warned, the Italian and French economies collapse in the next three years the UK will have to find tens of billion to plug the gap. 

