‘We are missing out badly on a big and new emerging world’ says Nigel Farage

2016-06-22

LBC

In the clash that saw tempers flared, Lord Heseltine admitted that he thinks there would be a time when Britain will join the Euro.

The pair were also asked their thoughts regarding Brendan Cox’s comment that he believed his wife Jo was killed last week because of her politics. 

Lord Heseltine added the language in the EU debate has been “deplorable” and some of the posters used have been “highly questionable”.



LBC

 I am hoping that Thursday will prove that first they ignore you, then they laugh at you, then they attack you, then you win

Nigel Farage

The Tory grandee said: “It is not to say that the people who use this language intend to inflame but the problem is there is an audience out there who are prepared to be inflamed.”

Mr Farage said the Sottish Referendum was far more violent than the tone used in this EU referendum. 

He said: “Remain have used the situation to paint themselves as the good guys and us as the bad guys. It was an isolated act of terrorism.”



LBC

Mr Farage said that getting onto the housing ladder, especially in London has become an “impossible dream” because of the high number of migrants coming to the city and he highlighted other public services that are at breaking point due to immigration. 

Mr Farage said we would have to build one new house every four minutes night and day to keep up with the number of people coming to the country.

He said that we have an open border that is open to 508million people. 

On migrants coming to the country, Lord Heseltine said: “This is not a European issue, it is a consequence of our economy.”

The Conservative politician said there are clear policies to ensure new housing is built. 

He said: “The essence of the Brexit case is to create all these fears about people who might come.”

The Ukip leader said the £34m which the UK gives to the EU each day will be a “very good start” on sorting out social issues in the UK.

Lord Heseltine described Mr Farage’s figure as “phoney” and said that leaving the EU would have a “devastating impact” on our economy.

Mr Farage said: “We are missing out badly on a big and new emerging world, we are finding ourselves trapped inside a cartel run by a big business and we are paying too much money for motor cars we import from around the world.”

Lord Heseltine said there are no independent organisations on the side of Brexit. 

However, Mr Farage pointed out that there are many individual entrepreneurs who are backing the out campaign, he described the benefits of the EU as “illusory”. 

Lord Heseltine said that for 70 years, the EU has brought peace and is keen for Britain to join the euro at some point. 

He said: “It would not be right to join the Euro today, but I do think there will be a time when Britain should consider it.”



LBC

One caller in the debate asked: “Why is everyone so negative towards Nigel Farage?”

The MEP then quoted Gandhi and said: “I am hoping that Thursday will prove that first they ignore you, then they laugh at you, then they attack you, then you win.”

Lord Heseltine has slammed the “racial element” in Ukip’s controversial Breaking Point poster and said Mr Farage belonged to the far-right. 

He did not say that Mr Farage was a racist, but compared him to the far right figures Donald Trump and Marine Le Pen. 

Talking about the EU, Mr Farage said that people were “taken into something” thinking that it was about friendship and it finished off with flags, anthems and “very shortly armies”. 

He said it was the politicians who wanted the UK to stay in the 28-country bloc. 

When asked why abandon out friends in the EU, Mr Farage said: “There is a political class across the world who like the idea of big, supranational projects.”

He highlighted that Norway and Switzerland are countries to be copied as they are “rich, free and can catch their own fish.” 

When asked what their predictions are for the outcome of the referendum, Lord Heseltine said: “I think the weight of the opinion will be to remain” and Mr Farage said: “I think that Leave will win but not by very much".

