Brexit: How did the pollsters get it so wrong?

2016-06-24

PA

But pollsters will be left with egg on their faces after incorrectly predicting the result yet again. 

Leave is projected to win by four percentage points after a dramatic turn in events. 

In the last Ipsos MORI poll on the day of the vote, Remain appeared to storm ahead with an eight point lead. 

And a YouGov poll predicted 52 per cent of voters backing Remain to 48 per cent for Leave. 

And while the Daily Express triumphantly predicted a Brexit, other newspapers missed the mark. 

The Daily Mirror reported Nigel Farage's concession reported at the start of the whirlwind night. 

Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), makes a statement after Britain voted to leave on the European Union

The Ukip leader had predicted a narrow victory for Remain, but as the Leave side racked up constituencies the outspoken Brexiteer heralded a victory. 

While the estimations were not far out in terms of percentages, the polls backed the wrong side.

These predictions were not General Election-style exit polls, but they both put Remain on course to win the in/out vote. 

Even political scientist Professor John Curtice - the only pollster to get the 2015 election result right - got it wrong this time. 

His referendum findings for The Telegraph leant towards a fairly comfortable win for Remain, but then Leave edged into a narrow lead with two weeks to go. 

But following the tragic death of pro-EU MP Jo Cox and a controversial migration poster from Ukip, the polls were at knife-edge. 

PA

And on the eve of the vote, Remain appeared to be narrowly in the lead. 

Pollsters have previously been blasted for making poor predictions. 

Last year’s General Election saw pollsters fail miserably to get anywhere near to foreseeing the right result. 

Figures before last year's General Election put Labour and the Conservatives neck-and-neck heading into polling day. 

But the exit poll painted a different tale, predicting the Tories to end up the largest party.

The actual result saw the Conservatives clinch a narrow majority in the Commons.

The string of failures by pollsters to predict the right result has resulted in many political commentators and followers losing faith in polling. 

