Corbyn hits out at EU on tax, migrants and sovereignty – despite campaigning FOR Remain

2016-06-21

Jeremy Corbyn chastised Brussels for overruling Britain’s sovereignty, shielding tax havens and its "appalling" handling of the migrant crisis.

He insisted he was "no lover of the EU" and that his tepid support for the bloc was "not unconditional by any means".

The left-wing Islington North MP then went on to unleash a tirade against the EU, listing severals problems he felt were endemic within the bloc. 

Mr Corbyn's weak defence of the EU came during a Sky News Brexit Q&A where he took questions from young Britons. 

PA

The socialist leader has been accused of running a lacklustre Remain campaign. 

During the Q&A, he was asked why he changed his mind after voting against membership of the European Economic Community in 1975.

The Labour politician insisted that the European Union must change "dramatically" if Britain remains a member after Thursday’s referendum.

He told the young audience that staying part of the 28-member bloc has "implications".

EPA

 I'm opposed to TTIP because it would import the worst working conditions and standards from the US into Europe

Jeremy Corbyn

He said: "I'm opposed to the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), which is being negotiated largely in secret between the European Union and the US because it would import the worst working conditions and standards from the US into Europe.

"I'm also opposed to the way in which Europe shields tax havens – this country as well shields tax havens.

"And the way in which systematically big companies are exploiting loopholes in employment laws.

"But I would also say that if we are to deal with issues like climate change, like environmental issues, you cannot do it within national borders, you can only do it across national borders.

"So I'm calling for a Europe in solidarity. I want to remain in Europe in order to work with others to change it."

He also said that the EU makes it "too difficult" to claim asylum for refugees.

He explained: "The refugee crisis has to be dealt with internationally, not just nationally.

"The idea that you can just walk into a country and get refugee status is far far from the reality."

PA

Towards the end of the Q&A, he said that whether Britain votes to stay or leave, "we have got to work with it".

One man in the audience claimed that the Labour leader "doesn’t sound convinced" about the Remain campaign.

Euro Guido tweeted: "Five minutes in, Corbyn is listing all the things he doesn't like about the EU."

Another Twitter user said: "Corbyn made the EU sound worse than Cameron ever could."











