Support Britain’s fishing industry by voting Leave

2016-06-16

GETTY

The Common Fisheries Policy has been nothing short of a disaster not only for those who make their living from the seas but for the coastal communities built on the back of the fishing industry. 

Signing away control over our national waters and permitting Brussels to hand out quotas has allowed foreign fishing fleets to take over. 

It has also led to the absurd situation whereby tons of perfectly good fish – which are already dead – have to be thrown overboard in order to comply with the rules. 

Yesterday the anti-EU campaign group Fishing For Leave, along with Nigel Farage, sailed up the River Thames to register their support for leaving the EU. 

But they were met by a torrent of abuse from Sir Bob Geldof, himself leading a rival fleet made up of Brussels supporters. 

Sir Bob should feel thoroughly ashamed of himself. This is a man who has made millions by sitting in recording studios and performing in concerts. 

What right has he to pour scorn on Britons who work long hours in tough conditions yet still struggle to keep their businesses alive because of Brussels rules? 

Our trawlermen, their families and their communities deserve our support. In a week’s time we must vote Leave and give our fishing industry the chance to thrive once again.

Eleven suspected illegal migrants, a number of them children, were discovered in a lorry in Harold Hill, Essex, yesterday. 

The relentless flow of people making their way here shows no sign of abating. This is despite huge public anger at the Government’s failure to secure our borders. 

With the EU referendum just days away Remain campaigners are desperate to avoid the topic of immigration. 

GETTY

But they cannot hide from the fact that the EU’s obsession with open borders has made it far easier for migrants from across the world to make it to Britain illegally. 

The referendum finally gives all those sick and tired of our leaders’ limp response to immigration the chance to have their say. 

It is no surprise that Brexit is enjoying such strong support.

GETTY

The England and Wales football teams face each other in the European Championship today in a fixture that will divide friends, neighbours and colleagues. 

All we can say is may the best team win and let’s hope the rival fans in France behave themselves whatever the final score.

