REVEALED: The most expensive place to live in Europe - and it's NOT Britain

2016-06-22

GETTY

A new survey by leading fixed fee estate agent eMoov.co.uk has found that Luxembourg, which commands a whopping £4,541 per sq ft, tops the table of most expensive European countries in which to buy a home.

Sweden comes in at second place, at £3,992 per sq ft, while even France, where property costs an average £3,423 per sq ft on average, beats the UK, pegged at £3,280.

Even that, however, is a third more than the European average of £1,967 per sq ft. 

 The UK property market and the influence a Brexit has been a big talking point

Speaking last night Russell Quirk

That’s because of the chasm between both ends of the league table. 

Bringing in the bottom, Hungarian property can be bought for a bargain £830 per sq ft; Romanian homes fetch £781 per sq ft while Bulgaria offers the cheapest property, at £634 per sq ft.

When it comes to capital cities, however, it’s a different story – at the top of the table, anyway.

GETTY

London, where one in five homes is worth more than £!m, is still the priciest city in Europe, with property worth around £12,468 per sq foot – twice the value of its nearest rival, Paris, where property fetches £6,010 per sq ft. in third place Stockholm, Sweden, commands a respectable £5,844 per sq ft. 

And while Italy occupies a gentle 9th place, with house prices pegged at around £2,757 its capital, Rome is the fourth most expensive city in Europe, with houses and flats fetching £5,201 per square foot. 

Budapest (£940 per sq ft), Bucharest (£889 per sq ft) and Sofia (£734) reflect national positions. 

GETTY

Speaking last night Russell Quirk, founder and ceo of eMoov.co.uk, said: “The UK property market and the influence a Brexit has been a big talking point and understandably so because, for the average UK homeowner, their property is the most expensive asset they are likely to own. 

“This research isn’t an attempt to sway people either way. It simply shows the strength of the UK market against the rest of the EU, and highlights that fact that, despite the London bubble, there are other areas across Europe where prices outperform that of the United Kingdom. 

GETTY

“It’s also worth remembering that, regardless the outcome on Thursday, with the precarious mixture of easily obtained credit and inflated property prices continuing to boost the UK property bubble, something will eventually give anyway. 

“I for one think that a cooling off  in demand caused by uncertainty in the market, be it as a result of a leave or remain outcome, could be a healthy thing and help return the UK market back to some level of stability.”

