Your country needs YOU: Vote Leave today to make Britain even greater

2016-06-23

GETTY

After years of growing domination by Brussels, the fate of our country now lies in the hands of the British people. At stake today is nothing short of the survival of Britain. 

The outcome of the Referendum will be either the trumpet blast of freedom or the death knell of our nation. If the electorate votes to leave, then we will regain our independence and self-respect. 

As a sovereign democracy once more, we will take charge of our own laws, borders, taxes, justice and welfare. No longer a province of the European Union’s empire, we will resume our rightful place among the great nations of the world. 

But if the electorate votes to remain, our subjugation to the EU will deepen. With our sovereignty destroyed and our identity obliterated, we will be shackled ever more tightly to the sclerotic, dysfunctional bureaucracy of Brussels, becoming nothing more than a satellite of a German-led superstate. 

A decision for remain will dramatically accelerate the process of federal integration which has always been the guiding purpose of the European Project. 

Tomorrow morning, if the Leave campaign is defeated, the noisiest celebrations will be held by the federalist ideologues in Brussels and Berlin, who will be delighted at the extinction of the last hope of resistance to their plan for a unified, centrally controlled Europe. 

Earlier this year Pierre Moscovici, the French Socialist and EU Commissioner for Economic Affairs, was asked how he viewed the British Referendum. 

He replied that he had “just one plan” for our country: “A United Kingdom in a United Europe.” Those words spell out the reality that continued EU membership will entail the abolition of Britain. 

The Remain camp talks blithely of how it is in our “national interests” to remain under the rule of the Brussels regime. But the advance of federalism means that ultimately there will be no British nation at all as long as we remain trapped inside the EU. 

 Hardly anything so perfectly embodies the achievements of the European unification as open borders

Martin Schulz, President of the EU Parliament

In the event of victory for the Brussels cause, the sweeping extent of the integrationist agenda will soon become apparent. Already the EU has five presidents, an executive, a flag, a civil service, a parliament, a currency, a supreme court and a diplomatic corps. 

It now plans to develop other trappings of nationhood, including a European Army, a common security policy, a European Prosecutor and a European Intelligence Agency. 

It also aims to harmonise all taxation and welfare benefits across the member states, in the name of eliminating competition within the single market. 

Within five years, Britain could be bullied into accepting the euro, just as we have been forced to accept free movement even though we opted out of the borderless Schengen zone.

Even more disturbingly, with its insatiable hunger for power, the EU wants to enlarge its territory to embrace Albania, Macedonia, Serbia, Montenegro and Turkey, all impoverished countries with far lower standards of living than Britain’s. Already, thanks to our EU membership, an incredible 508 million people have the right to settle here. 

A remain vote will add at least another 80 million to the total. The Remain camp prattles about using our veto to halt such developments. 

GETTY

But that supposed veto will be utterly meaningless if we vote to stay inside the EU. In those circumstances, we will have no leverage at all in any negotiations, no power to challenge the will of Brussels. 

Flushed with triumph, the Eurocrats will act like a conqueror towards a defeated people. The only way to have a real veto is by voting to leave. 

The EU is not just undemocratic. It is an unaccountable, self-serving oligarchy that ruthlessly ignores or crushes the popular will in its drive to achieve political unification. 

None of the five EU Presidents is elected, nor are any of the 28 commissioners. The EU executive is so powerful that it can remove the democratically elected governments of Greece and Italy, yet its Parliament is so feeble that it cannot initiate any legislation. Shortly before the 1975 Referendum, the Labour politician Tony Benn visited Brussels and was appalled at what he found, as he recorded in his diary. 

“I felt as if I were going as a slave to Rome. The whole relationship was wrong. Here was I, an elected man who could be removed, and here were these people with more power than I had and no accountability to anybody.” 

More than 40 years later those words are more potent than ever. Shamefully, the Remain camp claims that there is something xenophobic or insular in seeking national freedom. 

In the BBC Wembley debate on Tuesday night, London Mayor Sadiq Khan even described the Leave movement as “Project Hate”. But that just shows how the pro-EU has lost its moral bearings. 



The desire for democratic self-governance is one of mankind’s noblest impulses. It is the ideal that inspired the independence movements in Ireland and India in the 20th century, as well as the challenge to German tyranny during the Second World War. 

“No taxation without representation,” cried the Americans in their fight against colonial rule in the late 18th century. 

Today, no US citizen would dream of accepting governance by an unelected quango based in Bogota or the right of everyone from South America to settle in their country. Nor is there anything dangerous about national self-determination.

It is the natural status for every free nation on earth. After all, there are 195 countries in the world and 167 of them manage to exist without the EU’s blundering, bullying control. 

The Remain lobby continually wails that the Leave campaign has not provided a detailed plan for life under Brexit. But we do not need any such scheme. 

GETTY

Freed from Brussels, we would just return to the position we held as a sovereign, democratic country before we entered the Common Market in 1973. 

The real risk lies in continued membership of the EU, permanently tied to a failing organisation that mixes rampant megalomania with epic incompetence. 

On top of the destruction of our nationhood, our future under Brussels would be one of endless migration crises, expensive bailouts, terrorist incidents, growing political extremism and social breakdown. 

This is an outfit so mismanaged and so contemptuous of public money that its accounts have not been given a clean bill of health for two decades.

The present violent conflict at Calais, fuelled by the EU’s addiction to free movement, is a bleak symbol of the mounting discord that awaits if we vote to remain instead of taking control of our own migration policy. 

“Hardly anything so perfectly embodies the achievements of the European unification as open borders,” said the President of the EU Parliament Martin Schulz last year. 

GETTY

Inadvertently he revealed how the dogma of the maniacal federalists is sowing the seeds of European civilisation’s demise. Unable to make a positive case for the EU, the Remain campaigners have slid into deceit. 

But their grim warnings could hardly be more hollow. Brexit will not mean economic catastrophe. On the contrary, we will be far more prosperous. 

As the head of the Remain camp Sir Stuart Rose admitted, wages and living standards will actually rise when we can set our own limits on immigration instead of facing the uncontrollable import of cheap labour. 

Public services will no longer be under such stress, while the burden on the welfare system will be reduced. Even David Cameron says that 40 per cent of EU migrants, both in work and on the dole, are supported by benefits. 

Nor will we have to fork out a gross sum of £18billion a year for the coffers of Brussels, money that could be far better spent on our own priorities such as the NHS. Denial and defeatism are also central to the Remain campaign’s message. 

12 reasons why you should vote IN or OUT of EU

They argue that we have to stay in order to “reform” the EU from the inside. But that is a hopeless task.

The EU is not interested in reform, only in federalism, as it showed through its imposition of a humiliating deal on Cameron after his futile renegotiations. 

Even more offensive is the Remainers’ pretence that we could not survive without the rule of figures like German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker. 

Britain is a great country, the fifth largest economy in the world, the inventor of Parliamentary democracy, the pioneer of the Industrial Revolution and the victor in two world wars. 

Remain will spell “the end of a thousand years of history”, to use the famous words of patriotic Labour leader and Eurosceptic Hugh Gaitskell. 

But if we vote to leave, an exciting new chapter in our island story will be written.

