WATCH: Farage's inspiring Brexit rallying cry that will make you proud to be British

2016-06-22

The Ukip leader's inspiring message dismisses the dismal scaremongering of Project Fear doom merchants who have "lost faith in their country" and paints an upbeat image of a confident Britain forging its own way in the world. 

Instead he makes a patriotic plea for the British people to free themselves from the elitist and undemocratic shackles of the EU, citing our "amazing" history and bright prospects for the future. 

In a stirring video released by the Leave.EU campaign Mr Farage says Remainers like David Cameron who think we are "better off letting other people make our decisions for us" are "wrong". 

And he argues the pro-Brussels camp are only so attached to the EU because in their hearts they do not have the conviction or the confidence to believe they are good enough to make the UK a better place for its 60million inhabitants. 

AFP/Leave.EU

Leave.EU

Against their message of doom and destruction he strikes an optimistic and upbeat tone, praising Britain's "amazing history of entrepreneurialism, sporting greatness, and amazing science". 

He roars: "We are big enough to stand on our own two feet. We are strong enough to make our own mark on the world.

"And we are brave enough to make our own decisions, live under our own laws, bear our own failures and forge our own success." 

And in a rousing vision for a free and prosperous future he concludes: "Let's have peace, trade and honest friendship. Let's believe in ourselves and let's make June the 23rd Independence Day." 



 We are a great country, a proud country, a brave country

Nigel Farage

The inspiring message is designed to tug at the heart strings of undecided voters who are sick and tired of Mr Cameron and his lackeys like George Osborne constantly talking Britain down. 

Even today, just hours before the British people vote in the historic referendum, the Prime Minister has toured the country trying to browbeat communities into submission with prophesies of economic apocalypse in the event of a Leave vote. 

But a bombshell poll released tonight shows the Leave camp has opened up a commanding seven point lead when people's likelihood to vote is taken into account, indicating his Project Fear tactic has spectacularly backfired. 

NIGEL FARAGE'S SPEECH IN FULL



There are some people who think our best days are behind us. 

They think we're too small, too weak, too worn down to hold our heads high and walk tall on the world stage.

They've lost faith in their country and they've lost faith in their own ability to make a success of it. 

They think we're better off letting other people make our decisions for us. 

They are wrong. We are a great country, a proud country, a brave country. 

A country with an amazing history of entrepreneurialism, sporting greatness, and amazing science. 

We are big enough to stand on our own two feet. We are strong enough to make our own mark on the world.

And we are brave enough to make our own decisions, live under our own laws, bear our own failures and forge our own success just like our friends in Australia and Canada and any other proper democracy anywhere else in the world.

Let's have peace, trade and honest friendship. Let's believe in ourselves and let's make June the 23rd independence day.

