Just FOUR DAYS to save Europe from itself: Boris Johnson issues referendum rallying cry

2016-06-19

GETTY 

He said the people of Britain will be leading the rest of Europe on the path towards liberation from a “deeply undemocratic” system incapable of change.

He said: “Britain is not turning its back on Europe. We will continue to be engaged with Europe; we will never cease to be a great European power, but you don’t have to do it through the institutions of the EU, which I think are very undemocratic.

“How I see it is that we have got four days left to save Europe. Unless we vote for change it will go on and on in a totally undemocratic way.”

He added: “This is our moment when the British people take centre stage in history, this is when the eyes of Europe are on us and I think hundreds of millions of people are praying that we will do the right thing and vote for change because they are locked in a system that is incapable of change.

“I think if we do this we will be speaking up for democracy in Britain and in Europe and it will be a fine thing that will echo through the ages.

Pros and cons of Brexit

It is four days to an independence day and until we speak up for freedom.”

Mr Johnson said Britain will always be supportive of its neighbours.

He added: “As a country we love Europe; we love the European continent and civilisation; we will always be attached to it; we will always be friendly and supportive but we have got to stop being enmeshed in a bureaucratic and top down undemocratic system of government. I believe it is an unshackling of Britain.

“If this was a club and you were being asked to join now would you dream of doing it?

The answer is no, so why stay in? Let’s get out and drive change.”

Until Britain goes to the polls on Thursday, Mr Johnson says he will be criss-crossing of the country in a final push to sway voters.

He said: “I think this is a once in a lifetime chance to take back control from the unelected, undemocratic, unaccountable and unreformed EU.

We have never gone wrong in this country if we believe in ourselves and we believe in our country. “There is no time in our history when we have suffered by making our politics more accountable and more democratic and I hope that we seize this chance on Thursday to take Britain forward.”

GETTY

Mr Johnson added: “What we will be trying to do for the people who are undecided in the next few days is to just try to very gently and politely get some of the facts across as we see them.

“This is a moment when the British people should trust themselves and should believe in this country’s democratic institutions and should back themselves. We can never go wrong by backing ourselves.”

Mr Johnson, who will be attending his daughter’s graduation in Scotland on the day of the referendum, claims Britain can immediately start taking back control of its borders and reestablishing the supremacy of Parliament if the country votes to leave.

Asked what would happen in the first 100 days if Britain votes for Brexit, Mr Johnson said: “The first thing to do is begin by repealing sections two and three of the European Communities Act 1972 so that you re-establish the supremacy of Parliament.“

That means that you can no longer be forced to have people with very serious criminal or indeed terrorist convictions on the streets that you might want to deport, so you take back control of your courts.



GETTY

“You can also begin work immediately on an Australian style points based immigration system which would be fair to people coming from all parts of the world – not just from the EU but also outside the EU as well.”

Mr Johnson, who said he is pro-immigration, added that taking back control of our borders will also help kill off the farRight.

He added: “I don’t like extremism, I don’t like the far-Right parties that you are seeing coming up across Europe.

“I’m a one-nation Conservative and in many ways I am a very moderate liberal Conservative but I think that the problem with immigration is that politicians have promised they can control it when legally they can’t and they can’t legally control it because we are in the EU.

GETTY

“You can only spike the guns of the extremists and the people who are genuinely anti-immigrant if you take back control because I think it’s the public sense of the loss of control that is leading to so much disquiet.”

On Tuesday, Mr Johnson will face Scottish Conservative leader Ruth Davidson in the BBC’s final televised debate of the referendum campaign.

Ms Davidson will be joined on the main stage at Wembley Arena by Mr Johnson’s successor as London mayor Sadiq Khan and TUC general secretary Frances O’Grady for the Remain side.

Mr Johnson will team up with Energy Minister Andrea Leadsom and Labour MP Gisela Stuart.

