Leading Islamic association calls on Britain’s Muslims to vote to REMAIN in EU

2016-06-22

GETTY

The Muslim Association of Britain (MAB) issued a statement lending its support for staying despite acknowledging it “is not a perfect body”. 

MAB president, Dr Omer El-Hamdoon, said: “This is undoubtedly the most important vote Britons will ever cast in our generation; and Muslims should use their vote for a stronger Europe.”

In a statement on its website, it set our their views for voting In. 

It believes Britain is “much stronger” as a member state, and Brexit would revive calls for Scottish independence. 

The website says: “Exit from the EU runs the risk of perpetuating rifts in British society, which would increase levels of hate crimes against British Muslims. 

“The past few years have witnessed a disturbing rise of xenophobia and Islamophobia in our society.

“Sadly, the recent London mayoral elections have highlighted the extent to which the vilification of Muslims has become part of mainstream political discourse.”

It also pointed towards immigration, one of the hot topics of the referendum, citing statistics in favour of open borders. 

GETTY

It claims: “Between 2001 and 2011 immigrants from the original 15 EU countries contributed 64 per cent more in taxes than they received in benefits.”

UK-born workers are more likely to collect benefits than their European counterparts, it added. 

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

And its views on the refugee crisis were clear: “As for the refugees, they are the victims of war and persecution. 

“So, while membership of the EU offers opportunities for a multilateral approach to the crisis, leaving the EU still does not relieve Britain of its international obligations toward them.”

GETTY

Staying the EU ensures the free movement of people - a positive in the group’s eyes. 

The European Arrest Warrant, EU consumer laws and the Convention of Human Rights were all other reasons it cited to vote in. 

Overall MAB summed up by echoing David Cameron's message that Britain is “stronger, safer and better off in Europe”.

It said: “Not only has the EU contributed to the health of our economy and environment; it has given Britons opportunities to live, work and study in member countries. 

GETTY

“It has made Britain more diverse and safe. For all the above reasons the MAB believes leaving the EU will not only result in economic, environmental, corporate and security risks, but could also seriously undermine social harmony in Britain.”

But its stance drew some criticism, with Riaz Sobrany replying to their online statement saying: “I am very disappointed with the article MAB Backs Vote to Remain in EU. 

“It is shallow, superficial, and it appears that the MAB has a very poor knowledge and understanding of the EU.”

The voters go the polls tomorrow, June 23, in a historic referendum on whether to leave the EU.



