UK has a 'glorious opportunity' Boris Johnson hails Brexit and pays tribute to 'brave' PM

2016-06-24

In his first public speech since the historic result was announced, Mr Johnson paid tribute to "brave and principled" David Cameron following the prime minister's emotional resignation from Downing Street. 

The Tory MP said: "I believe he is one of the most extraordinary politicians of our age. 

"A brave and principled politician whose given superb leadership of his party and country for many years. 

"It was his bravery that gave this country the first European Union referendum in 43 years."

SKY NEWS

 "They have decided that it is time to vote to take back control from a European Union that has become too remote, too opaque and not accountable enough to the people it serves

Boris Johnson

Mr Johnson was also joined by the other main players in the Vote Leave campaign, Cabinet minister Michael Gove and Labour MP Gisela Stuart.

He said the Brexit vote gave the UK a "glorious opportunity" for a brighter future, and insisted that Britain would remain "a greater European power" outside the future Union of 27 nations.

Commenting on Brexit history, Mr Johnson dismissed suggestions it was "wrong" for the public to have been asked to decide on the issue and said it was "inevitable" that the question should have been decided by the people.

In a speech at Vote Leave's headquarters in London, he said: "In the end this question is about the people, it's about the right of the people in this country to settle their own destiny. 

"It’s about the rights of all of us to elect and remove the people who make the key decisions in their lives. 

"I believe the electorate has searched in their heart and answered as honestly as they can. 

"They have decided that it is time to vote to take back control from a European Union that has become too remote, too opaque and not accountable enough to the people it serves."

He went on: "I think it is a glorious opportunity. We can pass our laws and set out taxes entirely for the need of our economy."

The Tory MP arrived at Leave headquarters on the Embankment at around 10am.

However, his car did not stop outside the front entrance where dozens of press reporters, photographers and video journalists had been braced to expect his arrival.

Instead, the former mayor of London was swept in through a back entrance to the building, again without making comment.

REUTERS

Speculation over whether Mr Johnson will become the UK's next prime minister is rising after an emotional David Cameron announced his decision to resign following the historic EU referendum result. 

Mr Johnson is now 8/13 favourite to become the next leader of the Conservatives and 8/11 favourite to become the next prime minister, accordingto Coral. 

It comes after Mr Johnson, a key figure in the Vote Leave campaign, was targeted by abusive members of the public as he left his home in Islington, north London.

GETTY 

GETTY 

Brexit: What to expect next

Leave officially passed the winning mark just after six o'clock this morning as voters demanded the UK untangle itself from the 28-country bloc.

At 7.25am the official result declared Britain had voted for Brexit by 51.9 per cent to 48.1 per cent.

Overall, with all votes now counted, 17,410,742 Britons voted to quit the EU with 16,141,241 voting to Remain. 

