Nigel Farage urges voters to 'believe in Britain'

2016-06-19

GETTY

In a final battle cry, Mr Farage said Britain is good enough to thrive as a self-governing, independent nation.

In an exclusive interview with the Sunday Express, he said: “This Thursday is our golden opportunity. It’s the chance to reject the political class who have given away control of our country.

“The establishment who have lost confidence in our nation don’t believe in this country. They don’t think we’re good enough.

“But I do. I believe in Britain. We are good enough to thrive as a self governing, independent nation – and the British people tell me that they believe in this country as well. 

“We must have the confidence to take back control of our right to self determination and to chart our own course in the world, rather than being anchored by the EU and told what to do by unelected old men in Brussels.” 

Mr Farage, 52, said the key question for voters is what kind of country they want to bequeath to future generations. 

“If we remain, we will be subservient to European courts and to EU Commissioners. Our borders will remain open. 

 We must have the confidence to take back control

Nigel Farage

“We will be dragged into an EU army, into paying more money to the EU’s budget, into a eurozone crisis and an uncertain future with Britain unable to act in our own national interest.

“But if we choose to leave we have an exciting future ahead of us with amazing possibilities. 

“We will control our borders again. We will stop sending billions of pounds to Brussels and can spend the money here, on our priorities. 



“Most importantly, we will get our democracy back. Our elected representatives in this country will be the ones who make the big decisions.

“Past generations fought and died to preserve and protect our precious democracy.

"By leaving the EU we will gain the ability to govern ourselves.”

GETTY

Mr Farage said that the “fundamentally flawed” EU has been a total disaster. 

He added: “Let’s believe in our country, in ourselves. We are good enough. 

“On Thursday, vote to Leave the EU and let’s make June 23 a historic day for this country. The day we took back control; our Independence Day.” 

