Brexit: What will happen to foreign footballers when Britain leaves the EU?

2016-06-24

Getty

Arsenal manager Arsene Wenger has waded into Brexit debate by suggesting that foreign footballers could be barred from Britain if they suddenly need to get work permits. 

Wenger said that Brexit could jeopardise the influx of European footballers into the UK, leaving "the Premier League with some questions”.  

West Ham chief executive Karren Brady also warned: "Leaving the EU would hurt our leagues, create uncertainty for European transfers and be a step back for the next generation of footballers."

But Brexit supporters have rubbished the scaremongering claims and pointed out that Premier League players already come to play in Britain from all over the world. 

UKIP’s Deputy Leader Paul Nuttall said: “At the moment there are players coming to Premiership from many countries that aren’t members of the EU, so why would it have any detrimental effect?”



Sports immigration lawyer Maria Patsalos, from law firm Mishcon de Reya, explained that European football players already in the UK were likely to remain here after Brexit. 

She told Express.co.uk: “If Brexit happens, it is unlikely that current EU players in the UK will be affected.”

But Ms Patsalos warned that a EU exit could make it harder for European football players to come over to Britain in the future. 

She said: “The FA should definitely look at reforming their immigration position, as failure to do so could have a serious impact on attracting world-class players to the UK going forward.”

BREXIT: WHAT WOUKD HAPPEN TO UEFA?

Which stars from your club would not have automatically qualified for work permits in the Premier League last season?

Ms Patsalos said that the visa route currently used by most footballers from outside Europe was flawed and inflexible. 

The lawyer said: "If the vote is to leave the EU, under the current rules players like Dimitri Payet or N'Golo Kante would be barred from playing in the UK as their international records would not meet the FA criteria required. 

“Decisions like this could be appealed – as they were for Willian and Coutinho of Chelsea and Liverpool respectively – but this is time consuming and creates uncertainty for both clubs and players.”

The entry criteria for the visa route, known as Tier 2, is based on the percentage of first-team games that a footballer has played in a FIFA ranked club.

Ms Patsalos said some top talent – such as an Argentinian understudy to Lionel Messi – would not qualify under current rules because they have not played enough first-team games. 

Getty

Brexit campaigners have long argued that leaving the UK could give talented young British footballers the chance to shine.

Former England player Sol Campbell said: “We are seeing teams load up with too many mediocre overseas footballers, especially from Europe, crowding out young English and British talent.”

He added: “Because of European rules on freedom of movement, it is virtually impossible for us to get a proper grip on the situation.”

Mr Nuttall, from UKIP, also argued that leaving the EU would “smooth the development path” for home-grown players from Britain. 

He said: “The academies aren’t able to push players on to full-time contracts because they find it cheaper to recruit an established player from overseas.”

Express Sport takes a look at which players have covered the most ground on average in the Premier League this season

Football agent Rachel Anderson acknowledged the potential benefits for home talent even though she said "about half” of the Premier League would need work permits. 

She said: "The short-term impact would be huge but you could argue it will help in the long term as it could force clubs to concentrate on home-grown talent.”

A Leave.EU spokesman said: “Nothing will happen to football players that the FA does not want to happen.

"It is the FA that limits non-EU players so strictly to protect grassroots football. 

“Once we are out of the EU it is likely that they will relax rules for them and tighten them up for EU players to keep the balance between grassroots and international football players but have more diversity of nationalities and playing styles.”

