Bringing out Golden Balls: David Beckham backs REMAIN and David Cameron is 'DELIGHTED'

2016-06-21

WENN • ITV • GETTY

In a rather lengthy Instagram post which he shared with his 24.3 million followers this morning, the former footballer wrote: "We live in a vibrant and connected world where together as a people we are strong."

His message was posted alongside a snap of him in his Manchester United days as he celebrates scoring a goal.

He began his post by saying: "I'm passionate about my country and whatever the result of Thursday's referendum, we will always be Great. Each side has the right to their opinion and that should always be respected whatever the outcome of the European Referendum.

 I'm passionate about my country and whatever the result of Thursday's referendum, we will always be Great.  Each side has the right to their opinion and that should always be respected whatever the outcome of the European Referendum. "I played my best years at my boyhood club, Manchester United.  I grew up with a core group of young British players that included Ryan Giggs, Paul Scholes, Nicky Butt and the Neville Brothers.  Added to that was an experienced group of older British players such as Gary Pallister, Steve Bruce and Paul Ince. Now that team might have gone on to win trophies but we were a better and more successful team because of a Danish goalkeeper, Peter Schmeichel, the leadership of an Irishman Roy Keane and the skill of a Frenchman in Eric Cantona. I was also privileged to play and live in Madrid, Milan and Paris with teammates from all around Europe and the world. Those great European cities and their passionate fans welcomed me and my family and gave us the opportunity to enjoy their unique and inspiring cultures and people. We live in a vibrant and connected world where together as a people we are strong.  For our children and their children we should be facing the problems of the world together and not alone. For these reasons I am voting to Remain

A photo posted by David Beckham (@davidbeckham) on Jun 21, 2016 at 12:15am PDT

ITV

 We live in a vibrant and connected world where together as a people we are strong. For our children and their children we should be facing the problems of the world together and not alone

David Beckham

"I played my best years at my boyhood club, Manchester United. I grew up with a core group of young British players that included Ryan Giggs, Paul Scholes, Nicky Butt and the Neville Brothers. Added to that was an experienced group of older British players such as Gary Pallister, Steve Bruce and Paul Ince."

Beckham continued: "Now, that team might have gone on to win trophies but we were a better and more successful team because of a Danish goalkeeper, Peter Schmeichel, the leadership of an Irishman Roy Keane and the skill of a Frenchman in Eric Cantona.

"I was also privileged to play and live in Madrid, Milan and Paris with teammates from all around Europe and the world.

"Those great European cities and their passionate fans welcomed me and my family and gave us the opportunity to enjoy their unique and inspiring cultures and people."



David Beckham is clear: we should be facing the problems of the world together and not alone https://t.co/oRuRB4PZgq pic.twitter.com/aDHdrlhZ1O

GETTY

GETTY

The father-of-four finished by saying: "We live in a vibrant and connected world where together as a people we are strong. For our children and their children we should be facing the problems of the world together and not alone. For these reasons I am voting to Remain."

Meanwhile, speaking on today's Lorraine, Prime Minister David Cameron opened up about a conversation he'd had with the father-of-four.

"There was a very moving statement today from David Beckham talking about his children… what he said to me was, ‘you can’t win in Europe, unless you're on the pitch'."

He continued: "That's true, I worry about that as Prime Minister. I know that we sit around the table [with Europe] and make decisions about security and safety and fighting terrorism and all the rest of it, fighting climate change and if we leave they don’t stop meeting and making decisions that affect us, but they’ll be making decisions about us but without us in the room and that would be bad for Britain."

Lorraine airs weekdays at 8.30am on ITV.

