Lithuanian multi-millionaire challenges Nigel Farage to  €1million bet on Brexit

2016-06-20

AFP/ GETTY

Lithuanian MEP Antanas Guoga has upped the stakes on the Ukip leader’s recent £1,000 bet on Brexit. 

In a letter Mr Guoga said: “A big day is approaching: a day when the UK will decide to stay in the EU.

“Obviously, you are not so convinced yet. 

 I am so confident that the British people will do the right thing and vote to remain in the EU that I offer a €1 million charity bet to you on Leave

Antanas Guoga

“Therefore, I want to make a huge offer to you ahead of the historic in/out referendum this Thursday. 

“I am so confident that the British people will do the right thing and vote to remain in the EU that I offer a €1 million charity bet to you on Leave!” 

If Mr Farage accepts and Britain votes to leave the EU, Mr Guoga will donate the money to the Ukip leader’s charity of choice.

The Lithuanian politician, who made his fortune playing poker under the name Tony G, says Russia will be the big winner in the event of Brexit and he is in favour of reforming the 28-state bloc. 

He said: “I know that you, in particular, and many British people love to criticise the ineffectiveness of the EU. I agree.

“I am a huge advocate for EU reform. I am sure there is no need for two Parliaments in Brussels and Strasbourg when one could do the job. I am so tired of taking that train to Strasbourg every month. 

AFP

TWITTER

“This can all and will be reformed - with the UK in the EU. We need you here and we need you to be stronger.

“Don’t leave Europe to Germany and France. That would be a pity for markets, businesses, researchers, innovators, entrepreneurs and creators worldwide.

“Also, I wouldn’t like Putin to raise a toast to Brexit. I lived under the Big Bear and I didn’t like that too much.

GETTY



“Me and my mother had to flee. I think that the biggest winner in Britain leaving the EU would be Russia and I don’t feel safe about it observing what is happening in Europe.”

A spokesman for Ukip said: “It’s nice that the Euro elite have so much money to throw around the place. Hard pressed working men and women must be so impressed at his frivolity.”

Campaigning for the EU referendum resumed yesterday after a three-day break following the killing of MP Jo Cox.

Three opinion polls show Remain recovering some momentum while betting odds have Remain ahead of the Leave campaign.

