Nicola Sturgeon's Brexit 'panic' as she plots second independence referendum

2016-06-16

REUTERS

The First Minister told MSPs she would consider "all optionsto protect our relationship" with the bloc amid a surge in support for Leave. 

Ms Sturgeon has previously warned that Scotland being pulled out of the EU against its will could trigger a rerun of the 2014 poll. 

The pro-EU SNP leader has played down the threat in recent days, as a significant proportion of Nationalists are in favour of cutting ties with Brussels. 

But yesterday she told MSPs that plans were being made to counter the "economic shock" of leaving the EU. 

Ms Sturgeon added: "Let me be very clear: as First Minister, my duty is to seek to protect Scotland's interests in all circumstances and, therefore, I am ensuring that appropriate planning for all eventualities is being undertaken by the Scottish Government. 

"Let me also say - I have said this many times before - that, if Scotland faces the prospect of being taken out of the European Union against our democratically expressed will, all options to protect our relationship with Europe and the European Union will require to be considered." 

The SNP's election manifesto said Holyrood should have the right to stage a second independence referendum if there was "a significant and material in circumstances". 

 Our relationship with Europe and the European Union will  require to be considered

Nicola Sturgeon

It cited the possibility of Scotland leaving the EU against the wishes of most voters. 

Ms Sturgeon's latest comments follow a poll showing a collapse in support for Brussels among Scots, while Brexit has gained a lead across the UK ahead of next Thursday's in-out referendum.

Scottish Vote Leave director Tom Harris claimed the contingency plans were a sign of panic. 

He said: "There is no doubt they are panicking like mad. 

"The First Minister has been encouraging Scots to vote in such heavy numbers as to keep England inside the EU against its will. 

"She said that would be acceptable.

GETTY

"So she cannot now complain that there is anything wrong at all in Scotland being taken out of the EU by English votes. 

"She has already approved that in principle." 

Eurosceptic Tory MSP Ross Thomson said: "What couldn't be clearer is regardless of what happens on June 23 the people of Scotland do not want another independence referendum and I will work with my colleagues to oppose any attempt to have one. Scotland won't be forced into another referendum against its will." 

It came after Ms Sturgeon replied to questions from Scottish Labour leader Kezia Dugdale. 



She claimed 300,000 Scottish jobs were linked to the EU and the relationship was "absolutely vital" for the economy. 

The exchanges came despite 'purdah' rules prohibiting Holyrood from debating the referendum in the final two weeks before the vote. 

Tory MSP Margaret Mitchell, who backs Brexit, objected to the issue being raised during First Minister's Questions. 

GETTY

But her complaint was dismissed by Presiding Officer Ken Macintosh. 

Ms Sturgeon's spokesman later said: "All options are under consideration. I would simply refer to you what the manifesto said at the recent election with regard to that. 

"It is a very, very specific reference to exactly this scenario which was spelled out in a black and white. 

"That proviso is in the manifesto. That would influence thinking." 

