Brexit in the making: Timeline of the road to the EU referendum

2016-06-22

Getty

For many decades Eurosceptic politicians have fought to set Britain free from the shackles of the EU and its predecessors. 

Britain first joined what was then the European Economic Community (EEC) in 1973. Here is a look at the long road to the EU referendum tomorrow. 

The British public last had the chance to vote on whether the UK should continue its membership of Europe in 1975. 

Even though most Britons voted to remain part of the Common Market, there were many powerful Eurosceptic voices in the debate. 

Since 1975, the economic union has gained political power and has grown dramatically in terms of size and far-reaching influence. 



Getty

More than 40 Tory MPs defied then Prime Minister John Major by voting against the ratification of the Maastricht Treaty in May 1993. 

The Maastricht Rebels refused to support the Conservative Government in a string of votes over the implementation of the treaty in British law. 

The deeply controversial treaty integrated Europe to create the European Union. 

Express

The Daily Express became the first mainstream national newspaper to demand that Britain should leave the EU in November 2010. 

The newspaper took the stand amid growing frustration at rule from Brussels. It soon became one of the fastest-growing campaigns in newspaper history.

More than 373,000 people filled in coupons calling for an EU exit or joined the crusade online.

HOW THE DAILY EXPRESS HAS CAMPAIGNED TO LEAVE THE EU

Five years ago the Daily Express began its crusade for a referendum on Britain’s membership of the EU. 

The newspaper published a ground-breaking free special edition setting out the case for Britain’s withdrawal from the EU. 

By August, more than 25,000 people had backed its online petition calling for a vote. 

Daily Express covers

The Express won that fight but believes that now the “real battle” is joined for Britain become an independent country again by leaving the EU.  

“We firmly believe that all the nations of Europe, with their infinitely diverse cultures, would be better off out of the EU, restored to their proud and time-honoured ways of life,” it said. 

“So now, just as we did when we first launched our crusade in 2011, we call on all our readers to support our crusade to get Britain out of the European Union.”

More than 80 Tory MPs defied David Cameron’s orders and backed a call for a referendum on Britain’s membership of the EU. 

Rebel MPs voted for a motion calling for an EU referendum despite the Prime Minister having ordered his party to oppose it. 

But the call for a referendum was defeated because Labour and Liberal Democrat MPs voted against the motion.

David Cameron declared that the Britons must "have their say" on Europe as he pledged an in/out referendum if the Conservatives won the 2015 election.

The Tories won the election in May 2015, paving the way for the EU referendum. 

EU REFERENDUM 2016: KEY DATES

The Prime Minister announced the date of the EU referendum after securing a deal to revise Britain’s membership of the EU. 

Mr Cameron confirmed the date of the referendum at the end of a crunch summit with other EU leaders in Brussels. 

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

After months of campaigns and debates, the people of Britain will tomorrow have the chance to have their say over the EU. 

The EU referendum is the biggest decision facing the British public in half a century. 

EU REFERENDUM: WHEN DO RESULTS COME IN?

