A historic week in our island story starts now

2016-06-20

GETTY

This is the most significant week in Britain’s modern history since the referendum of 1975 which asked the public whether we should stay in the European Economic Community, as it was then known.

But somehow this referendum of 2016 seems much, much more important not least because of the tone of the debate which has often been shrill, bitter and rancorous.

And back in the 1970s the EEC had not developed into the all-consuming monster it has now become.

Britain has never had easy relations with continental Europe and it is an issue which divided the Labour Party in 1975 and has always divided the Tories.

This week, one way or another, the question will be settled for a generation.

The Remain camp has used immigration as a stick to beat the Leavers, accusing those who are concerned about the issue of being racist Little Englanders who want to take this country back to the 1950s. The attitude is both patronising and wrong.

For many who want us to leave the EU the most emotional and profound issue is that of sovereignty.

GETTY

For somehow over the past four decades – despite assurances that this would not happen – Britain’s right to govern itself has been taken away from us.

The nation that has not been invaded for nearly 1,000 years has been quietly conquered by unelected bureaucrats.

We can no longer make our own laws or determine our own destiny or have a say in who comes here. This is the true heart of the issue. This is what voters must consider in these final critical days.



IN 2014 the then justice secretary Jeremy Wright stressed the importance of cutting the number of foreign criminals held in English and Welsh jails.

Since then there has been a net reduction of 678 which is hardly impressive and meanwhile there are still almost 10,000 inmates in our prisons who should be sent back to where they came from.

In theory these people will be deported once they have finished their sentences but even if that happens they are still a drain on resources during their time behind bars.

GETTY

JUNE had threatened to be a complete washout with the Queen’s 90th birthday celebrations and Ascot both blighted by rain.

But there are signs that the weather is finally improving.

The world has felt like a grim place in the last few days. We could all do with a little sunshine.

