Brexit: Will Britain's withdrawal from the EU mean we can't compete in Eurovision?

2016-06-24

GETTY

Understandably, there are many more pressing qualms put forward this morning, but it's one which matters to millions nevertheless. 

In a nutshell, David Cameron has assured Britain will be able to qualify for more nil points. 

During Prime Minister's Questions in April the Prime Minister was asked by Labour MP Helen Goodman: "Could the Prime Minister tell the house what the worst argument he’s heard from the Brexiters is?"

The Tory leader replied: "I think probably the one that we’d get out of the Eurovision Song Contest ...Not only would that be incredibly sad but given that Israel and Azerbaijan and anyone anywhere near Europe seems to be able to enter – and Australia – then I think we’re pretty safe from that one."



GETTY

Twitter reacts to news of David Cameron's resignation

 Should the UK decide to leave the EU, they will still be eligible to enter the Eurovision Song Contest

The EBU

And he's right. All members of the European Broadcasting Union, who are a separate body from the European Union, are eligible for Eurovision. 

The EBU was set up 43 years before the EU and ensures that while Britain's future appears cloudy, its one certainty is its place in Eurovision. 

A spokesman for the EBU previously told Metro.co.uk: "The Eurovision Song Contest is a non-political event and participation in the show is dependent upon the national broadcasters being members of the European Broadcasting Union and not related to EU membership. 

"Should the UK decide to leave the EU, they will still be eligible to enter the Eurovision Song Contest."



GETTY

 Should the UK decide to leave the EU, they will still be eligible to enter the Eurovision Song Contest

The EBU

In response to the Tory leader's comments during the PMQ, they added: "We were happy to observe such broad knowledge of the Eurovision Song Contest, even in the corridors of Westminster!"

This morning, Cameron announced he has resigned as the country's Prime Minister. 

Speaking from Downing Street, he claimed he was no longer "the right captain to steer this country". 

GETTY

During an emotional address, during which his voice broke, the 49-year-old said: "I was absolutely clear about my belief that Britain is stronger, safer and better off inside the European Union, and I made clear the referendum was about this and this alone – not the future of any single politician, including myself.

"But the British people have made a very clear decision to take a different path, and as such I think the country requires fresh leadership to take it in this direction.

"I will do everything I can as Prime Minister to steady the ship over the coming weeks and months, but I do not think it would be right for me to try to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination."

