Inside Politics: Signs that the Cameron era is nearing its end

2016-06-18

GETTY

The Prime Minister broke with convention by announcing his Downing Street retirement date well in advance. His plan was for a dignified departure more akin to a US president bowing out after completing a second term than a British prime minister bundled out of Number 10 by a Cabinet revolt or electoral defeat. 

Just 13 months after his surprise general election triumph Mr Cameron’s dream appears to have been extinguished. With his standing in his party and among voters tarnished by his anti-Brexit scaremongering onslaught, suspicion is growing at Westminster that his departure will be much sooner than expected whatever the referendum result. 

Campaigning for the historic vote resumes next week after the suspension following the horrific killing of Labour MP Jo Cox. The mood will be subdued as Westminster continues to mourn the loss of a sparky and dedicated newcomer. Before the tragic news broke, Downing Street aides were already fretting about how to find the right tone for the final week of the battle. Insiders say that Mr Cameron’s inner circle were unnerved by some private polling results delivered at a Number 10 meeting last Monday. 

The research suggested the Remain campaign is on course for a resounding defeat. It also showed that the voters seen as crucial to the result – the less well-off who have gained little from economic growth in recent years – have been repelled by the Prime Minister’s pro-Brussels campaigning and had paid no attention to his alarm-raising about the alleged dangers of Brexit. 

Downing Street’s response to the polling was to crank up the volume on the “Project Fear” klaxon about a supposed economic meltdown if the country votes to quit the EU. George Osborne threatened a punishing post-Brexit Budget with tax rises and spending cuts totalling around £30billion. His stunt is thought to have backfired, making little impression in the country at large while triggering a furious Tory revolt at Westminster. 

“This was thoroughly demeaning behaviour from the Chancellor,” one senior Tory MP told me. “George has surely delivered his last Budget. Both he and the Prime Minister have sacrificed their credibility for the sake of trying to keep us in the EU.” 

Tory insiders say that even if Mr Cameron defies the polls and wins a victory for Remain on Thursday his relationship with much of his party has been ruined. 

GETTY

In the Leave campaign, cautious optimism about the referendum result is growing. “We cannot get carried away with the polls but it does look like this is a 50-50 fight in the final days as long as we stay focused,” one insider on the Vote Leave battle bus told me. “We only need to be ahead on one day – let’s hope it’s Thursday.” 

On the campaign trail with Vote Leave this week I witnessed the enthusiasm that Brexit supporter Boris Johnson is generating among voters leaning towards Leave. “Our next prime minister,” was a prediction repeatedly heard as the Tory former London mayor thundered around Lowestoft, Cromer and ­Norwich in a whistle-stop tour on Thursday. 

One fan barged through the crowd to slap him on the back and urge him to go for Mr Cameron’s job. Mr Johnson may face a tougher task winning over Tory MPs in a future party leadership contest. Yet the referendum campaign has confirmed his appeal to voters far beyond the traditional Tory heartlands. 

Tory MPs still speculate that an outsider candidate will emerge to snatch the prize in their next leadership contest. Tory energy minister Andrea Leadsom has won fans as a star of the Brexit campaign and Work and Pensions Secretary Stephen Crabb is a popular figure. The frequency of such leadership discussions suggests that the Cameron era is drawing to a close whatever the referendum result.

Why Theresa May has been kept in the shadows

SHE has been curiously absent from the fray for much of the EU referendum campaign. And this week Theresa May gave David Cameron a curt reminder of why he has attempted to keep her in the shadows for the duration of the crunch debate on Britain’s European future. The Home Secretary emerged from Whitehall to say in a BBC interview that the Government “should look at further reform” of free-movement rules for EU migrants if the country votes to stay in the EU. 

Government sources say her intervention provoked exasperation in Downing Street. The suggestion that Britain could introduce further limits on EU migration while still being a member of the bloc implied that the Prime Minister botched his negotiations for a new Brussels deal by pressing for such unambitious demands. Mrs May’s floating of the idea of tougher migration controls simply renewed attention on the immigration issue that has been such a powerful driver of the Leave campaign. 

Free movement of workers is one of the fundamental “four freedoms” at the heart of the EU single market dream, along with free movement of capital, goods and services. German Chancellor Angela Merkel made clear there would be no compromise on those principles from the start and Mr Cameron shied away from pressing the issue. 

GETTY

Her plan also laid bare that the Home Secretary has no faith in the Prime Minster’s insistence that his election manifesto promise to cut annual net migration to the “tens of thousands” can be delivered. Aides were convinced Mrs May’s outburst shows she is angling to take advantage of any Tory leadership opportunities thrown up after the referendum result. “Theresa is still up for a go at Number 10,” said one source. “She is clearly back on manoeuvres.” 

Her plan hinted at a possible “third way” compromise combining continued EU membership with an end to unlimited EU migration.

It indicates her desire to position herself as a unity candidate who can bring the Tory warring tribes together after the referendum. Months of battling over the straight choice between in or out of the EU has polarised the Conservative Party. There is little sign of any hope of comprise under her or anyone else's leadership.

