Jeremy Corbyn admits NO LIMITS TO IMMIGRATION while UK remains in EU

2016-06-20

GETTY

Asked on BBC One’s Andrew Marr show if there was any kind of upper limit to the numbers coming into Britain, he said: “I don’t think you can have one while you have a free movement of labour – and I think the free movement of labour means that you have to balance the economy so you have to improve living standards and conditions.

“And so that means the EU’s appalling treatment of Greece... that is a problem. If you deliberately lower living standards and increase poverty in certain countries in south-east or eastern Europe then you’re bound to have a flow of people looking for somewhere else to go.”

He insisted Britain did not have “uncontrolled” migration but stressed: “It’s the very principle of a single market across Europe, is the free movement of people. If you have the free movement of capital you should also have the free movement of people.”

 The In campaign have no answers how we can control immigration

Vote Leave chairman Gisela Stuart

The admission came as Chancellor George Osborne appeared to concede there was no imminent prospect of the UK meeting the Conservative goal of net immigration falling to below 100,000 a year from its current 300,000.

Vote Leave chairman Gisela Stuart, a Labour MP, said: “The In campaign have no answers how we can control immigration if we stay in the EU.

“They have no plan for how we will fund the NHS so it can cope with the extra pressures that staying in the EU will create.

SWNS

“They have no plan for where we will build the extra houses and they have no plan to help people who will see further pressure on their pay packets.

“The only way to get a fairer immigration policy and bring in an Australian style points-based system is to vote Leave on June 23.”

GETTY

Things you didn't know about Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn

Mr Corbyn’s comments caused further dismay among the Remain camp which is already frustrated by his apparent reluctance to speak up strongly for staying in the EU.

Labour voters are seen as crucial to Thursday’s referendum result and there are fears they are increasingly turning to Leave out of frustration at immigration and a sense their party is not heeding their concerns.

GETTY

Today Chancellor Osborne insisted it was possible inside the EU to get net immigration down to the target tens of thousands a year including by controlling non-EU numbers and ending the abuse of EU free movement, while improvements now seen in other European economies would reduce Britain’s lure.

But he told ITV’s Peston On Sunday that independent projections suggested net migration will fall “from the very high levels down to 180,000 over the next few years”.

