No surprise Brexit has sent shockwaves through financial markets, says DAVID SHAND

2016-06-24

GETTY

The upward movement in share prices and the pound in the run up to the poll had indicated investors increasingly felt a vote to remain was on the cards. So part of today’s sell-off is a reflection of how badly they were caught out.

Markets hate uncertainty and the feeling among many economists now is that a bumpy road lies ahead as Britain negotiates what is likely to be a complex divorce from the European Union, where it has prospered more than other leading economies over the past four decades.

Services, manufacturing and construction industries have all seen a slowdown in activity this year as companies have held back on investment decisions. A further decline in economic growth is now likely while the political hard talking continues.

The health of the banking sector and continued funding of small and mediumsized businesses will be crucial to oil the wheels of the economy, highlighting the importance of the strengthening of balance sheets by big banks.

Grants and loans currently provided by the EU will put extra demands on the UK government at a time when further austerity measures might have to be considered.

Bank of England Governor Mark Carney’s pledge that it stands ready, in effect, to do whatever is required to ensure the financial system continues to function smoothly, including providing £250billion of extra funding, has already begun to calm some of the nerves.

Brexit: What to expect next

GETTY

Further stimulus to the economy from a cut in interest rates becomes more likely but the Bank will need to balance this against the upward pressure on inflation as a weak pound – positive though this is for exporters – makes it more expensive for the UK to import goods. A new era for British business in a two-speed Europe will require renegotiation of trade deals, a complex process.

Some leading financial institutions have already raised the prospect of moving some of their operations to the Continent due to the risks of losing privileges from the EU’s “passporting” regime enabling them to sell services across Europe.

There may be a reluctance in the short term by companies looking to raise funds by listing on the London stock market but the capital’s status as one of the world’s great financial centres has been established over decades through innovation and pragmatism and it is hard to imagine these attributes diminishing to an extent that it puts its long-term future at risk.

GETTY

GETTY

As for Britain’s world class blue chip companies, many have overseas operations which means that a lower pound will boost the quality of their earnings. The much sharper falls today across leading European stock markets suggests there is more to fear for those countries whose economies have been slower to recover than that of the UK and which now potentially face political uncertainty of their own.

Further tests for financial markets lie ahead in the form of a possible fall-out from the presidential elections in America and France, not to mention future blips in the Chinese economy. UK plc has shown its resilience in rebounding from previous financial shocks.

But as well as their own drive and creativity, companies will now require politicians and policymakers to play their part in ensuring Britain remains open for business.

