Brexit: Why Premier League clubs may be unable to sign foreign players under age of 18

2016-06-24

GETTY

This could pose a threat to the clubs youth development, academies and scouting network, which could potentially damage the reputation of England's top division. 

Prime Minister David Cameron has announced he will step down after the Leave campaign defeated Remain with 51.9 per cent of the vote in the referendum on Thursday. 

And Paul Shapiro, an associate at law firm Charles Russell Speechlys, claims that this historic decision will have ramifications on the sporting world.

Which stars from your club would not have automatically qualified for work permits in the Premier League last season?

“While the focus of the UK's withdrawal from the European Union is likely to be on the impact on the City and migration, the impact on the sports world could be significant," Shapiro said. 

“Firstly, English players may not be able to move to the continent freely and EU nationals could be subject to entry restrictions when seeking to play in England, if post-Brexit they are treated in the same way as current non-EU nationals.”

But the biggest impact is likely to be felt at youth level with British players likely to be handed extra freedoms to impress coaches. 

However, it could prove problematic for Premier League sides to bring in crops of young talent from abroad. 

Shapiro added: “In addition, British football clubs may find themselves only able to sign foreign players over the age of 18 as, outside the EU/ EEA, they would no longer be able to benefit from the exception under the current Fifa regulations given for transfers involving 16 and 17 year old footballers within the EU/EEA. 

“Secondly, if EU law ceases to apply in the UK, the organisers of sports competitions may be able to more effectively restrict the number of foreign players that feature in match day squads as they could potentially include EU nationals and Kolpak players within any foreign player quota. 

“Some governing bodies may see this as advantageous in that it would allow them to discriminate in favour of the development of English qualified players to the potential advantage of the national team whereas it could be damaging to leagues/clubs who would be less competitive in their ability to attract the best players from across the continent.”

