Cynical George Osborne is destroying his political future, says CHRIS ROYCROFT-DAVIS

2016-06-17

GETTY

No, I’m not referring to Sir Bob Geldof’s behaviour on the Thames when he abused Leave campaigners – I’m talking about George Osborne threatening to punish us with spending cuts and tax rises if we dare to vote for Brexit. Those who know the Chancellor well are always quick to tell me he’s one of the most astute men in politics, the implication being that those who dare to criticise his handling of the economy don’t know what they’re talking about.

That defence no longer has credence. By his actions in the past seven days George Gideon Oliver Osborne has signed his political death warrant. Like the parrot in the Monty Python sketch he’s passed on, he’s no more, he’s ceased to be, he’s off the twig, kicked the bucket, shuffled off this mortal coil.

This is an ex-Chancellor. Osborne has betrayed every principle of good government with such disregard for the consequences that a large number of Tory backbenchers who saw him as a shoo-in for prime minister one day have now lost all confidence in him. If this country votes for Brexit next Thursday, Osborne will have to resign.

His bluff will have been called by the supposedly ignorant and ill-informed electorate he and the smug political classes despise so much. Now we may not understand their jargon about fiscal targets, narrow money and structural deficit but we’re all wise enough to know a Big Lie when we hear one. All that’s passed Osborne’s lips has been one hysterical deceit after another.



 The biggest threat to the economy is not leaving the EU – it is Osborne still being Chancellor after June 23

A Chancellor who blackmails us by threatening to stifle the economy, who scares people with lurid warnings about their pensions, who frightens the sick by telling them a Leave vote will damage the NHS is no longer fit to hold office. Much of the Cabinet, many Tory MPs and the majority of the grassroots voters have been driven to that conclusion.

The reaction of his own backbenchers is extraordinary. Had my brilliant Daily Express colleague Frederick Forsyth written a political novel in which 65 Tory MPs signed an open letter warning the Chancellor they would vote down his threatened emergency Budget, I rather think his publisher would have sent back the manuscript with a note attached: “Sorry. Too far-fetched.”

Hard to believe, isn’t it, that just 13 months ago the Tories were cockahoop they’d won an unexpected election victory? And yet today we have a Prime Minister who acts increasingly like an immature sixth-form debating society member and a Chancellor whose Brexit Plan B is to scorch and burn the economy in retribution.

With former party leaders Michael Howard and Iain Duncan Smith and former chancellors Nigel Lawson and Norman Lamont joining forces to accuse Cameron and Osborne of “peddling phoney forecasts and scare stories to frighten the electorate” we have powerful confirmation that Downing Street has sunk to an abysmal new low.

GETTY

The present holders of the highest public offices in the land have been exposed by men whose probity is beyond challenge because all of them served the country with honesty and transparency. It’s not as if Osborne can justify his latest wild forecast of a £30billion black hole by pointing to an outstanding record of economic forecasting during his six years running the Treasury.

His Budgets have been embarrassing, so cackhanded that he’s been forced to do high-speed U-turns, so incompetent that last November’s £27billion windfall he boasted about had somehow turned to dust by April. He couldn’t forecast the weather tomorrow, let alone what the economy will be doing after Brexit. Osborne has no credibility because he has cynically tried to put his future above the interests of the country.

GETTY

GETTY

The biggest threat to the economy is not leaving the EU – it is Osborne still being Chancellor after June 23. Once Cameron had stupidly let slip last year that he would be standing down as Prime Minister some time before 2020, Osborne saw it as his glorious chance to top the greasy pole. His ambition is so great that he would do anything and say anything to achieve it.

His friends will protest angrily at this assessment but we have incontrovertible evidence to prove the case. What happens next week, if it goes the way the pollsters now think, will I believe trigger a bigger political earthquake than the fall of the Berlin Wall.

Reasons to remain or leave the EU

Across Europe people will rise up to demand an end to rule by a political elite in Brussels which happily sacrifices their well-being on the altar of a federalist dream doomed to fail. At home Cameron and Osborne will have to resign because the country will have demonstrated it has no faith in them.

The Conservative Party will need to unite very quickly under a new leader. The Labour Party will be in turmoil as Jeremy Corbyn, its weakest leader ever, faces the painful truth that it was working-class Leave votes – in defiance of Labour policy – that helped swing Brexit. If parting is such sweet sorrow, then leaving will be joyous salvation. Now if only we can persuade gobby Geldof to leave too…

