‘Vote Remain and we'll accept 1966 win and stop mocking Prince Charles' ears’ says Germany

2016-06-23

GETTY

In a bid to influence the UK vote, the publication made the outlandish promise alongside a host of other concessions. 

The front page of Bild, the country’s largest selling daily newspaper, shows a photo of the 1966 World Cup event between England and West Germany. 

They promise to acknowledge the controversial goal scored by Geoff Hurst, which made the score to 3-2, before the England star sealed victory with a late strike. 

The 1966 tournament was the last time England won the World Cup. 

It was the first hat trick ever scored in a World Cup final but Germany has hotly contested the goal ever since, claiming it landed on the line after hitting the crossbar. 

If Britain stays, @BILD will acknowledge the Wembley goal #EUref #Tomorrowspaperstoday @suttonnick pic.twitter.com/DPxHo0IbK9

As millions of voters head to the polls today, in what has been billed as the most important decision in a generation, some other bribes are on offer from the European powerhouse. 

A Royal Wedding, The Wombles and a new James Bond

Under the title “Dear Brits”, as well as the goal, Germany is prepared to stop making jokes about Prince Charles’ ears and to stop using suncream on the beach in solidarity with our sunburn. 

 GETTY

Also offered to tempt voters is Germany reserving sun-loungers for us with their towels, introducing tea-breaks, and turning their clocks back to sync their time with the UK.

Which stars from your club would not have automatically qualified for work permits in the Premier League last season?

Back to football, and they have also promised to do away with a goalie in a penalty shoot-out, to make it “more exciting”, and German national football manager Jogi Loew will be sent to guard the Crown Jewels. 

Das ist sehr gut! #Remain https://t.co/9Pwa6idgbb

They have also agreed to come over to celebrate the Queen’s 100th birthday, and will introduce an EU regulation banning a frothy head on a beer. 

Polls up and down the country opened at 7am as people decided whether to stay or leave Europe.

