Husband of MP Jo Cox says 'bring our country back together'

2016-06-24

GETTY

In the wake of the historic referendum, in which the British people voted to break away from the European Union, Brendan Cox, whose wife was killed last week, has called for unity. 

With the possibility of a Scottish independence referendum also looming, fears have been raised the United Kingdom may forever change. 

Still grieving from his wife’s death, Mr Cox tweeted: “Today Jo wld have remained optimistic & focussed on what she cld do to bring our country back together around our best values #MoreInCommon.”

Her death saw the suspension of campaigning from both sides as a mark of respect.

Prime Minister David Cameron, who announced he is stepping down in the wake of the result, shared a platform with rival Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn to pay tribute to Mrs Cox, something they failed to do for the EU referendum. 

Her husband sent the message in the early hours of Friday morning, as the seismic decision to leave the EU sunk in. 

The UK voted 52 per cent to 48 per cent to leave, in what was the highest turn-out for a vote since 1992, at 72.2 per cent. 

Jo Cox, former MP for Batley and Spen, was a passionate member of the Remain campaign.

GETTY

The 41-year-old was killed just before holding a surgery for constituents in her home town. 

She was shot and stabbed multiple times in a horrific attack which left he with fatal injuries on June 16. 

School children and teachers throw flowers on to the hearse carrying murdered Member of Parliament Jo Cox's as her funeral cortege will passes through Heckmondwike in northern Britain

Thomas Mair, 52, has been charged with murder, grievous bodily harm, possession of a firearm with intent to commit an indictable offence and possession of an offensive weapon.

A provisional trial date has been set for November.

Today Jo wld have remained optimistic & focussed on what she cld do to bring our country back together around our best values #MoreInCommon

Her body has been released to her family following the conclusion of the autopsy, so her bereaved family can “get on with their lives”.

Detective Superintendent Nick Wallen, of West Yorkshire Police, told the hearing it was evident she was “very seriously injured”.

He said: “The police and ambulance service were called by a number of emergency calls to Market Street in Birstall town centre where initial information was that a man armed with a gun and knife had attacked and seriously injured a man and a woman.

"Police officers and paramedics arrived quickly at the scene and firstly found a male named Bernard Carter Kenny, aged 77, being tended to by members of the public.

GETTY

"He had sustained a stab wound to the abdomen."

They then found Jo being tended to by members of the public. 

Despite paramedics best efforts she was pronounced dead in the ambulance outside Birstall library at 1.48pm.

Coroner Martin Fleming confirmed the mother-of-two died from multiple stab and gunshot wounds.

