Deadline: How to apply for emergency proxy if you CAN'T get to polling station

2016-06-23

Getty

Time has run out to apply for an emergency proxy vote if you are unable to get to the polling station today. 

If you are stuck in dire straits due health or work reasons then an emergency proxy would have allowed someone else to vote on your behalf. 

But unfortunately the deadline for emergency proxy applications was 5pm today, five hours before the polls close. 

Only people who have had a medical emergency or have been called away for work could apply for this type of proxy vote.  



The deadline for everyone else to vote by proxy passed on June 15. Flooding did not count as a valid reason to get an emergency proxy. 

Earlier today an Electoral Commission spokeswoman said: “It would be something like they have been taken to hospital or can’t get to the polling station because of a medical emergency.

“Or something in their working life has come up and they have had to leave.

"Anyone in those those situations can go to our website, download the form and send it back to their local authority by 5pm.”

Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP), makes a statement after Britain voted to leave on the European Union

Medical emergencies/away for work unplanned may constitute grounds for #EURef emergency proxy in GB – apply by 5pm: https://t.co/ujsLe2oBLx

The Commission website said: "If you have just had a medical emergency arise that means you cannot go to the polling station in person, you can apply to vote by emergency proxy.

"You can also apply to vote by emergency proxy if your occupation, service or employment means that you cannot go to the polling station in person, and you only became aware of that fact after the proxy vote deadline (15 June).

"You can apply for an emergency proxy vote up until 5pm today. You must be registered and eligible to vote in the EU Referendum to apply for an emergency proxy vote."

The forms were available on the Commission's website.

