A vote to leave will give power back to the British people, who will once again be able to hold their government to account

2016-6-23

IT is finally here, the day Britain has been waiting for, the day this great country can take back its destiny.

If we vote to leave the European Union, we will wake up tomorrow in a Britain where a new door has opened to a stunning future for our children and grandchildren.

It will be up to us to build that future because we will have our democracy back.

No more pointless shaking our fists at those people in Brussels who we never voted for and who won’t let us do the things we know Britain needs.

I will never forget the excitement of being at Wembley Arena on Tuesday night, the electricity in the crowd when Boris Johnson told them today could be our Independence Day.

Our campaign has given a vision for Britain as a nation again free to make its own laws and decisions.

People everywhere have told me how they want to get back the power to shape their country.

That means things like controlling our borders. My Labour colleague Gisela Stuart is an immigrant, I am the daughter of immigrants.

Britain can only succeed by being the open-minded, welcoming place we know it is.

That is why it is important we have immigration the British people are happy with and the security we need.

By voting Leave, we will get back control of the billions of pounds we send to the EU every year.

That will mean we can make laws and trade agreements that our businesses need to power ahead and create jobs and prosperity.

They will not be held back by the never-ending Brussels bureaucracy.

We will have a healthy relationship with our European neighbours.

The head of the biggest organisation representing German businesses said yesterday it is essential free trade continues if we leave.

The Remainers have so little faith in Britain and the abilities of its people.

They have shown a shocking lack of confidence in Britain’s strength.

But Sun readers know how great this country is, and I know you believe in it passionately.

A vote to leave will give power back to the British people, who will once again be able to hold their government to account.

It is the optimistic, patriotic choice. It is the gift we can pass on to the next generation.

Let’s go vote Leave today. Let’s take back our independence.

