'You're a 21st Century Neville Chamberlain!' Cameron mocked for appeasing EU leaders as he is hammered AGAIN by voters over his failure to tackle immigration

2016-6-19

David Cameron was hammered by voters over his failure to tackle immigration last night as he pleaded with them not to sacrifice the economy by leaving the EU.

The Prime Minister was told by one woman that public services were at risk of being 'flooded' by levels of inflows, while a man compared him to Neville Chamberlain for appeasing other EU leaders during his renegotiation bid. 

He was also accused of 'shameful' scaremongering during the referendum campaign - and refused three times to say that he would deploy Britain's veto to prevent Turkey joining the EU.

But Mr Cameron insisted there was no 'silver bullet' to bring down numbers and cutting ties with Brussels would severely damage UK plc.



The brutal exchanges came as he appeared in his last big television set-piece before the nation goes to the polls on Thursday.

David Cameron was involved in the brutal exchanges came as he appeared on a BBC Question Time special with just days to go until the nation goes to the polls

During the 45-minute BBC Question Time special, which took place as campaigning resumed after being put on hold in the aftermath of the fatal attack on pro-EU MP Jo Cox, Mr Cameron:

A string of polls have shown a surge for the pro-EU camp over recent days.

Research by Survation for The Mail On Sunday found Remain had opened up a three-point lead on 45 per cent to 42 per cent - reversing the firm's findings from Thursday.

Another showed the two sides are level while a third has voters saying they are more enthusiastic about leaving the EU than staying.

Pollsters have suggested that the apparent boost for Remain is down to undecided voters plumping for the status quo as the crucial ballot looms.

But there has also been some criticism that pro-EU campaigners are trying to make capital out of the killing of Mrs Cox. 

One audience member warned the PM that immigration was threatening to 'flood' public services 

Mr Cameron - who today used his Twitter feed to highlight a article praising ties with Brussels that was written by Mrs Cox days before her death - urged voters to defend her 'values'. 

'First of all let me say how shocked I think the whole country's been by this appalling murder,' he said.

'Two children have lost their mother and a loving husband has lost his wife and my heart breaks when I think of them and what they're going through.

'I think the most important thing for the politicians is to remember what she was all about, which was service, community, tolerance – these are values we should all try to live by and promote in order to remember her.

'I don't think we know why exactly this happened or what the motivation was or the rest of it and we have to wait until the police investigation until we do that. 

'But I think what we do know is wherever we see intolerance, hatred, division, we should try to drive it out of our communities, out of our public life and we have to be careful that debates – yes they can be passionate – but we have to make sure they're not based on those things.'

One man took Mr Cameron to task over the way he had 'appeased' fellow EU leaders during his renegotiation

David Cameron was hammered by voters over his failure to tackle immigration last night as he pleaded with them not to sacrifice the economy by leaving the EU

David Dimbleby was chairing the BBC referendum programme with Mr Cameron last night

Mr Cameron took the opportunity to hit out at Nigel Farage over his controversial poster depicting male Syrian refugees on the Slovenian border amid the refugee crisis last October.

The Ukip leader today dismissed criticism of the poster, which has come from both sides of the debate, and insisted it had only triggered such a 'row' because of Mrs Cox's death.

But Mr Cameron said: 'To be frank I think there have been some moments like the Nigel Farage poster which I think are just wrong – wrong in fact because it's a picture of people in the European continent from Syria and elsewhere, they're not coming to Britain.

'But actually wrong in motivation because it's an attempt to frighten people, to scare them, to divide people.' 

The Prime Minister dismissed claims his own campaign had been scaremongering and 'sour'.

'I would say that there's nothing more positive than trying to have a growing economy and having jobs and opportunities which is what the case for remain is all about,' he said.

Audience members berated Mr Cameron for the way the campaign had been conducted, with one woman saying 'both sides' should be 'ashamed of how they behaved'.

He was also mauled over his failure to tackle immigration - with net numbers currently running at a near-record 333,000 a year including 184,000 from the EU.

The Prime Minister was told that public services were at risk of being 'flooded' by levels of inflows, while audience members laughed at his claims that other EU states could be trusted not to renege on commitments to reform 

Mr Cameron, who had pledged to cut net migration to the 'tens of thousands' before entering Downing Street, was challenged by a young woman in the audience who told him: 'I think that it's an only logical thing to understand that if we have absolutely no limitations on immigration from the EU that people are obviously going to immigrate over here.

David Dimbleby shocked viewers with his gaffe on Question Time last night

David Dimbleby shocked the Question Time audience after mistakenly saying the first question of the debate came from an audience member called 'Jo Cox'.

The veteran presenter immediately apologised for the 'terrible' gaffe' and called the correct audience member, who asked David Cameron about the late Labour MP tragically killed on Thursday.

Introducing the opening question, Mr Dimbleby said: 'Right Prime Minister, our first question comes from Jo Cox please, oh sorry, Adam Bardy, what a terrible thing to say.'

After the broadcaster's embarrassing gaffe, Mr Bardy asked: 'Has this referendum soured the political debate in this country in the light of the murder of Jo Cox?' 

Mr Dimbleby received sympathy from TV viewers on Twitter, however, with David Bulls saying he must be 'mortified for that slip about Jo Cox'.  

'We've got our public sector, we've got NHS that's under tremendous strain at the moment – you're not doing anything to invest any kind of thing into them to make them any stronger or better - knowing full well that if we don't put a limit on this immigration - and the only way to do that is to leave the single market - then everything is just going to get flooded.

'You're not doing anything to counterbalance all the immigration coming into these services.'

The Prime Minister replied by insisting the only way of sustaining funding on the NHS was to have a strong economy by staying in the EU.

Pointing out the views of professional bodies in the NHS, Mr Cameron said: 'What I'd say is, let's take the health service. What I'd say is that we are putting more money into the NHS. 

'Now we can argue we should put even more in, let's work how to get the growth in our economy into the NHS.

'But when you listen to the people in the NHS – the Royal College of Midwives, the Royal College of Physicians, the guy Simon Stephens who runs the NHS, the trade unions who work in the NHS – they all want us to remain in a reformed European Union because they think that's better for the NHS because a bigger economy, a better economy, a stronger economy is always better for our NHS.'

However he was interrupted by the audience member, who shot back: 'But you keep saying this reformed European Union that we are part of. Yes, fair enough you've negotiated some changes that you say 'oh it's going to make a massive difference to the immigration'.

'But realistically it's not, it's not going to make a massive difference to the levels of immigration, especially considering we have other countries that are about to join the European Union.'

She said she wants to leave the single market and 'negotiate our trade worldwide'. 

'You are not doing anything to counterbalance all the immigration coming into those services,' he said.

But Mr Cameron said: 'It is really worth leaving the single market damaging our economy to make progress with this issue. There is no silver bullet on this issue. There is no simple way.'

Mr Cameron was roundly mocked by Twitter users during his performance. After the PM assured the audience that he would not be in Downing Street in 30 years, one wag joked that he would not last 30 days 

Challenged by presenter David Dimbleby that leaving the EU would in fact be a 'silver bullet', the premier insisted it would not be that simple.

'I am explaining why it has been a difficult thing to do,' he said. 

Mr Cameron was also taken to task over his previous claim that Isis terrorists want Britain to quit the EU. 

David Cameron took the opportunity to hit out at Nigel Farage over his controversial poster depicting male Syrian refugees on the Slovenian border amid the refugee crisis last October

David Cameron lashed out at Nigel Farage for trying to 'frighten' voters with his controversial immigration posters as he appealed for politicians to shun hatred in respect of the late Labour MP Jo Cox.

The Prime Minister was asked whether the bitter EU referendum campaign had helped create a 'sour' and divided political atmosphere in the light of Mrs Cox's death. 

He singled out the Ukip leader for  his 'wrong' poster published last week that told voters the EU was at 'breaking point' alongside a picture of male Syrian refugees walking along the Slovenian border during the migrant crisis last October. 

He said politicians should instead be reminding voters 'what she [Jo Cox] was all about, which was service, community, tolerance,' adding: 'These are values we should all try to live by and promote in order to remember her.

'I think what we do know is wherever we see intolerance, hatred, division, we should try to drive it out of our communities, out of our public life and we have to be careful that debates – yes they can be passionate – but we have to make sure they're not based on those things.' 

Asked to give an example of the type of 'sour' strategies that had helped sew division in society, Mr Cameron took the opportunity to hit out at Mr Farage and was careful to stay away from more blue-on-blue attacks.  



He said: 'To be frank I think there have been some moments like the Nigel Farage poster which I think are just wrong – wrong in fact because it's a picture of people in the European continent from Syria and elsewhere, they're not coming to Britain.

'But actually wrong in motivation because it's an attempt to frighten people, to scare them, to divide people.'

'I think the terrorists that want to do us harm want the West to be divided,' the premier said. 'They don't want Britain and France and Belgium and Germany to work together to defeat terrorism. They'd like to see us separate from each other.'

But one member of the audience in Milton Keynes asked him: 'Do you think by comparing the EU referendum to Isis, you are merely scaremongering rather than portraying the facts?' 

Told that he should feel 'ashamed', Mr Cameron responded: 'I certainly wasn't comparing the referendum to Isis or Daesh, I was saying that I think one of the strongest arguments for remaining in the EU is that we are stronger together, we are safer together.

'We do face a dangerous and insecure world. I've been your Prime Minister for the last six years and I sit in those meetings, and I see that we work together to try to face down these threats and I think we will be stronger if we work together.

'Working together against terrorism, working together against (Vladimir) Putin and his aggression in Europe, it must be better to try and stay together to work together, rather than to be separate.'

At one point a man in the audience attacked Mr Cameron over his EU membership renegotiation.

Comparing him to Tory predecessor Neville Chamberlain - who famously returned from talks with Hitler waving a 'piece of paper' committing to peace - the man said: ‘Mr Cameron, you say that your policy that you’ve negotiated with Europe cannot be overruled – it can.

'So are you really a 21st century Neville Chamberlain waving a piece of paper in the air saying to the public this is what I have, I have this promise where a dictatorship in Europe can overrule it?' 

Mr Cameron responded: 'What I say is that the other 27 prime ministers and presidents have agreed it and they know if Britain votes to remain they will implement it.'

Pressing on despite loud laughter from the crowd, the premier said: 'This is not some empire and dictatorship. 

'We are proving through this referendum that if Britain wants to leave this organisation we can, we are a sovereign country, we choose to join Nato or we chose to join the EU

'And if we choose to leave we leave, but let’s be clear if we do leave – that’s it.

'We’re walking out the door, we’re quitting we’re giving up on this organisation, which even if we leave will have a huge effect on our lives, on our children, on our opportunities and on our businesses.

'And I don’t think Britain at the end is a quitter, I think we should stay and fight – that’s what we should do.'

Mr Cameron invoked the memory of Winston Churchill, saying: 'He didn’t quit, he didn’t quit on Europe, he didn’t quit on European democracy, he didn’t quit on European freedom.' 

The Tory leader refused to say that he would deploy Britain's veto to prevent Turkey joining the EU.

David Cameron - who today used his Twitter feed to highlight a article praising ties with Brussels that was written by Mrs Cox days before her death - said: 'First of all let me say how shocked I think the whole country's been by this appalling murder



He insisted the issue of Turkey joining the EU was a 'red herring' because it wouldn't crop up for another three decades 'when I'm not going to be Prime Minister'.

But Question Time presenter David Dimbleby pressed him on why he couldn't 'stop the discussion' over Turkey by telling the world: 'I veto this'.

Mr Cameron replied: 'If this was going to happen in the next couple of years I would not support it, but it's not going to. This is about 30, 40 years' time.'  



He was repeatedly challenged over whether he would quit as PM if he lost the referendum on June 23, and whether he would call a snap general election.

But he insisted he would stay on and stressed that the Tory general election manifesto last year had included a commitment to hold a national vote on EU membership.  



Earlier, Tory ex-defence minister Andrew Murrison complained that pro-EU figures may be exploiting the tragedy to bolster support for ties with Brussels.

'Remain side spinning Jo Cox murder for partisan advantage in #EUReferendum shameful,' he wrote on Twitter.

Within hours the MP had deleted the post and replaced it with one that said: 'Can both sides in this horrible #EUReferendum campaign & the press use the last few days to put case squarely, honestly and decently?'



Tory MP Andrew Murrison tweeted that Remain supporters were 'spinning' Jo Cox's killing, before deleting the post and urging both sides to put their cases 'squarely, honestly and decently'

Pro-EU figures have stressed the need for unity and condemned the tone of the campaign in the wake of the killing.

Mr Cameron has highlighted a strongly pro-EU article Mrs Cox wrote days before her death.

Alongside a link to the piece, the Prime Minister tweeted: 'Jo Cox's strong voice in the campaign to remain in the EU will be badly missed.'

In a letter to the Observer today, Tony Blair, ex-deputy PM Nick Clegg and Conservative grandee Lord Heseltine say the vote is about 'what sort of country we are'.

The message - which was highlighted on Twitter by David Cameron - said: 'There is something more fundamental at stake: the sort of country we are. A democracy where disagreements do not degenerate into incivility and where debate is not used to divide our communities.

Boris Johnson told a rally in London today that Brexit was the best way to 'neutralise' extremists spreading fear about immigration 

David Cameron was branded the '21st century Neville Chamberlain' last night as he faced claims his EU reforms could be ripped up by fellow member states after Thursday's referendum.

An angry audience member mocked the Prime Minister's renegotiation, which was agreed after hard-fought discussions with EU leaders earlier this year. 

Waving his hands to mimic Mr Chamberlain's 'peace to Europe' non-aggression pact he signed with Germany a year before the outbreak of the Second World War, the audience member challenged Mr Cameron over whether voters could trust EU leaders to honour their word over the reforms. 

 

An angry audience member (pictured) mocked the Prime Minister's renegotiation, which was agreed after hard-fought discussions with EU leaders earlier this year

'Are you really a 21st century Neville Chamberlain waving a piece of paper in the air saying to the public this is what I have, I have this promise where a dictatorship in Europe can overrule it?' the middle-aged man asked.   

It drew an impassioned response from Mr Cameron, who insisted all other 27 EU leaders had agreed the changes and urged viewers to trust his European counterparts. 

He shot back: 'This is not some empire and dictatorship,' adding that Britain was a 'sovereign country' that can 'choose to leave' the EU. 

A visibly pumped up Mr Cameron added: 'But let’s be clear if we do leave – that’s it.

'We’re walking out the door, we’re quitting we’re giving up on this organisation, which even if we leave will have a huge effect on our lives, on our children, on our opportunities and on our businesses.

'And I don’t think Britain at the end is a quitter, I think we should stay and fight – that’s what we should do.

David Cameron was branded the '21st century Neville Chamberlain' as he faced claims his EU reforms could be ripped up by fellow member states after Thursday's referendum. Pictured, Chamberlain waves his notorious 'piece of paper' after talks with Adolf Hitler

Adding his own bit of history to the debate, Mr Cameron said: 'My office is it two yards away from the Cabinet room where Winston Churchill decided in May 1940 to fight on against Hitler, the best and greatest decision perhaps anyone’s ever made in our country.

'Now he didn’t want to be alone, he wanted to be fighting with the French, with the Poles with the others.'

'He didn’t quit, he didn’t quit on Europe, he didn’t quit on European democracy, he didn’t quit on European freedom.' 

David Cameron refused three times to say he would veto Turkey’s entry into the European Union.

The Prime Minister repeatedly ducked the question during his 45-minute appearance on Question Time, claiming there was no prospect of the country becoming a member in the near future.

He claimed the issue was ‘the biggest red herring in this referendum debate’ and that voting to leave for fear of Turkish entry would be a ‘crazy thing to do’.

But given three clear opportunities to say he would use his veto to stop it, he declined to do so.

The issue of Turkish accession has been a highly charged one in the EU referendum debate, with Leave claiming free movement rules could give millions of their citizens the right to work in Britain.

 Brexit campaigners said Mr Cameron sidestepped the question because in truth he is a strong backer of Turkish membership of the EU saying as recently as two years ago: ‘In terms of Turkish membership of the EU, I very much support that.’

Asked by audience member Michael Tindale (pictured) whether he would veto Turkey's membership of the EU, David Cameron replied: 'I don't think it's going to happen for decades so as far as I'm concerned that question simply doesn't arrive'

And they pointed out that earlier this year the EU announced it would be accelerating Turkish accession as part of an agreement to deal with the migrant crisis.

Vote Leave chief executive Matthew Elliott said: ‘You cannot trust Cameron on Turkey.’

Audience member Michael Tindale asked Mr Cameron: ‘Will you veto the accession of Turkey into the EU?’

The Prime Minister replied: ‘I don’t think it’s going to happen for decades, so as far as I’m concerned the question doesn’t arise.

‘I think this is the biggest red herring in this whole referendum debate. I can’t find a single expert anywhere in the country or in Europe who thinks that Turkey’s going to join the EU in the next three decades.’

Mr Cameron said negotiations were going so slowly that ‘at this rate they’ll join in the year 3000’.

He went on: ‘This issue doesn’t arise and I feel strongly about this because people are getting through their letterbox leaflets from Leave saying basically Turkey’s gong to join the EU – not true; there’s going to be a European army with Britain in it – not true; and we give £350million a week to Brussels – not true.

‘If we want to vote to leave this organisation, let’s vote to leave it but let’s not do it on the basis of three things that are completely untrue.’

David Cameron (pictured during the Question Time debate in Milton Keynes) refused three times to say he would veto Turkey’s entry into the European Union

Asked by host David Dimbleby whether he would veto Turkey’s entry, the Prime Minister replied: ‘It’s not going to come up’ – a response that was greeted with some jeers from the audience.

‘If this was going to happen in the next couple of years I would not support it, but it’s not going to,’ he said.

‘This is about 30 or 40 years’ time and I’m not going to be prime ministers in 30 or 40 years’ time. It’s a red herring.

‘If people have decided to vote leave on the basis of turkey joining the EU, you’d be voting to leave an organisation, to damage our economy on the basis of something that is not going to happen.

‘And that would be a crazy thing to do.’

Asked for a third time by Mr Dimbleby about why he does not say at this stage he will veto Turkish entry in the future, the Prime Minister again sidestepped the question.

He said Britain was being ‘positive’ to Turkey because we want it to be a ‘Western-leaning’ country, but admitted it ‘isn’t going very well at the moment’.

Referring to Turkish entry, the European army and the £350million claim, he said: ‘It would be tragedy if we damaged our economy, wrecked job prospects on the basis of three things that are completely untrue.’ 









Nigel Farage claims his pro-Brexit immigration poster only sparked such a row because Labour MP Jo Cox was KILLED 

Nigel Farage today insisted there would not have been such a 'row' over Ukip's controversial pro-Brexit immigration poster if Jo Cox had not been brutally killed.

The Ukip leader complained he was the 'victim' of hatred and insisted the party would be putting out more material focusing on the key issue of control over our borders.

The defence came as politicians from all sides in the EU referendum battle lined up to slam the 'racist' poster. 

Mr Farage unveiled the image - which featured the headline 'Breaking Point' over a photograph of refugees walking into Europe through Slovenia - on Thursday just hours before Labour MP Jo Cox was shot dead and the referendum battle was suspended.

Nigel Farage unveiled the controversial poster on Thursday, exactly a week before the EU referendum but was immediately condemned for the tone 

Michael Gove today revealed he 'shuddered' when Ukip unveiled an anti-immigration poster featuring refugees just a week before the EU referendum.

The Justice Secretary said the poster, branded racist by critics, was the 'wrong thing to do'. 

Chancellor George Osborne, who supports the Remain campaign, also condemned the poster today as having 'echoes' of far right literature from the 1930s. 

Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon, Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond and Brexit-backing Labour MP John Mann all slammed the poster in interviews today.  



Mr Gove said: 'When I saw that poster, I shuddered. I felt it was the wrong thing to do.

'I must stress, I believe in free speech, I don't want to deny anyone a platform, and when I have had the opportunity to talk about migration during the course of this debate.

'I hope I have been very clear I am pro-migration but the way in which we secure public support for the continued benefits migration brings, the way we secure public support for helping refugees in need is if people feel they can control the numbers overall coming here.'

Chancellor George Osborne, who supports the Remain camaign, also condemned the poster today as having 'echoes' of far right literature from the 1930s.

Mr Osborne told ITV's Peston on Sunday: 'I think there is a difference between addressing those concerns [about immigration] in a reasonable way and whipping up concerns, whipping up division, making baseless assertions that millions of people are going to come into the country in the next couple of years from Turkey, or saying that dead bodies are going to wash up on the beaches of Kent – or, indeed, putting up that disgusting and vile poster that Nigel Farage did which had echoes of literature used in the 1930s.

'That is what we should say no to and this referendum vote is a vote on the kind of Britain we want.'

Mr Farage today rejected the charge of stoking up hatred, telling ITV interviewer Robert Peston: 'I think I have been a politician who has been a victim of it, to be honest with you.

'When you challenge the establishment in this country, they come after you, they call you all sorts of things. We saw the Chancellor a few minutes ago - despite the fact that overnight he talked about turning down the rhetoric - doing the same thing again.'

Asked if he wished he hadn't unveiled the poster, Mr Farage replied: 'I wish an innocent Member of Parliament hadn't been gunned down on the street.

'That's the point, and frankly had that not happened, I don't think we would have had the kind of row that we've had over it.'

He added: 'There was a big momentum developing right across the country, [then] a tragic death... It's difficult to see where either of the campaigns go.'

Mr Farage said: 'That poster reflects the truth of what's going on. We have a new poster coming out tomorrow morning and we'll unveil a new poster for every day.'

Mr Gove defended the claims on immigration made by his own campaign about Turkey, insisting it was not wrong to ensure migrant numbers are controlled.

Interviewed by the BBC's Andrew Marr, Mr Gove was challenged on Vote Leave leaflets which claim Turkey's high birth rate would mean a million more people having the right to come to Britain.

Mr Gove said: 'I think it is important to stress that when we are thinking about the enlargement of the European Union - and it is the official policy of the EU to accelerate Turkey's accession.

'I think the fact that both the British government and the EU want Turkey and other countries to join is clear. The rate and speed at which Turkey will join will depend on a variety of political factors.

'But it is the case that during the course of this year the EU want to accelerate that process and I think that when Turkey is becoming less democratic that is not the right thing to do.'

Mr Gove denied discussion of Turkey's birth rate made him 'queasy' and added: 'I think it is very important when we are talking about migration to take into account numbers overall as well.

'One of the things about numbers is that we benefit from migration if the numbers are controlled.' 



Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn today admitted he did not believe there could be limits placed on free movement in the EU as he claimed the Government was at fault for not giving communities resources to cope 

Scottish first minister and SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon today renewed her criticism of the Ukip poster.

She told Sky News: 'In these last few days I hope we can have a debate that doesn't focus on immigration.

'Yes, people's concerns about immigration need to be addressed, but let's also make the positive case for a world and a Europe where we all have the freedom of travel and the positive case for immigration and the benefits that brings to our economy.

'On that point, the poster that Nigel Farage unveiled last week was vile and racist and I hope he does agree today to withdraw that poster, because that kind of sentiment has no place in a civilised debate.'

Appearing on the BBC's Andrew Marr Show, Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn was asked directly whether he thought there should be an upper limit on the numbers coming to the UK.

Chancellor George Osborne today said the Ukip poster had 'echoes' of 1930s literature  

Mr Corbyn said: 'I don't think you can have one while you have the free movement of labour, and the free movement of labour means that you have to balance the economy.

'So you have to improve living standards and conditions and so that means the EU's appalling treatment of Greece is a problem.

'If you deliberately lower living standards and increase poverty in south eastern Europe, then you're bound to have a flow of people looking for somewhere to go.

'Surely the issue is an anti-austerity, growth package all across Europe rather than this.'

Defending his poster amid attacks from all sides of the political spectrum, Mr Farage claimed 'all' the people pictured in the poster will have EU passports within years.

'This is a statement about the whole of the European Union and politically I really do think that the European Union is at breaking point,' he told the BBC as he unveiled the poster in Westminster. 

Mr Farage today told ITV Vote Leave should answer for their own posters.

He said: 'Well, have you seen their posters? They've been doing very strong posters, not only about Turkey, but about the number of terrorists and criminals who come into Britain under free movement rules.'

Brexit will NOT cause a recession but help Britain thrive, Michael Gove defiantly claims in a plea to the country to 'vote for hope' 

The Brexit vote is in the balance with polls showing the country may still be undecided ahead of Thursday's EU referendum. In One poll out today, by Opinium for the Observer, shows the race finely balanced at 44-44. A Survation poll for the Mail on Sunday shows Remain ahead 45-42 but a YouGov survey for Good Morning Britain shows Leave ahead 44 to 42. A fourth survey by BMG for Herald found Remain on 46 per cent to Leave on 43 per cent 

The Brexit vote is in the balance with polls showing the country may still be undecided ahead of Thursday's EU referendum.

A Survation poll for The Mail On Sunday found Remain had opened up a three-point lead in the wake of the killing of the Labour MP Jo Cox.

But another survey revealed today shows the two sides are level while a third has voters saying they are more enthusiastic about leaving the EU than staying.

Ukip leader Nigel Farage today said the killing could have halted 'momentum' behind the Leave campaign.  

Campaigning was due to resume today after a suspension lasting more than two days following the fatal attack on Mrs Cox, a strong supporter of Britain staying in the EU.

The man charged with her murder, Thomas Mair, gave his name as 'death to traitors, freedom for Britain' when he appeared in court on Saturday. 

The campaign appears to have turned around dramatically over the past few days, according to polls

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn is due to take part in a major BBC interview to mark Mrs Cox's death and make the case for Remain.

The BBC's Andrew Marr will also interview Michael Gove as campaigning resumes with just four days to go, while Chancellor George Osborne and Ukip leader Nigel Farage are both due to be grilled by ITV's Robert Peston.

Prime Minister David Cameron will take part in a live BBC Question Time special to make his case for staying in the UK.

Ukip leader Nigel Farage today the 'momentum' behind the Leave campaign was halted when the referendum was halted by Mrs Cox's killing.

He told ITV's Peston on Sunday: I think we have momentum.

'We did have momentum until this terrible tragedy. It has had an impact on the whole campaign for everybody.

'When you are taking on the establishment, you need to have momentum. I don't know what's going to happen over the course of the next three to four days, but (this was) the action of one person with serious mental issues.

'What we saw was an act of terrorism.'

A Survation poll for The Mail On Sunday found Remain had opened up a three-point lead in the wake of the Killing of the Labour MP Jo Cox (pictured)

Rival MPs could mix for tributes to Jo Cox in House of Commons 

Rival MPs could break with tradition and sit together in the House of Commons when they pay tribute to MP Jo Cox.

Leader of the House Chris Grayling said MPs should 'do what they feel comfortable doing', while Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn also signalled he was open to the idea.

Parliament has been recalled on Monday to allow MPs to remember Mrs Cox, who was killed in her constituency of Batley and Spen in West Yorkshire on Thursday.

Neighbouring Labour MP Jason McCartney, who represents Colne Valley, has written to Speaker John Bercow requesting that backbenchers be permitted to sit together across the House in a mark of solidarity.

Asked about the rules of the house, Mr Grayling said: 'I don't think there are any formal rules but I think for tomorrow's event it is a celebration and a commemoration and an expression of profound sadness and to my mind it is an occasion where people should do what they feel comfortable doing.'

Meanwhile, leader of the Liberal Democrats Tim Farron said it is a 'great idea' and would show that MPs are 'united against hate'. 

Mr Corbyn told the BBC's Andrew Marr Show: 'I received that suggestion last night actually and we're thinking about that and have a talk tomorrow, but tomorrow is going to be a dignified occasion, it's not going to be a time for lots of long speeches.'

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn said he was considering whether to allow his MPs to mix in with those of other parties during Commons tributes to Jo Cox tomorrow 

Michael Gove, pictured today arriving for an interview with the BBC's Andrew Marr 

Michael Gove today denied there would be a recession triggered by a Brexit vote on Thursday, rejecting an economic consensus warning of a downturn if voters quit the EU.

The Justice Secretary said Britain would in fact thrive if freed from the constraints of Brussels and in an 11th hour plea to the electorate, urged them to 'vote for hope'.

Mr Gove's intervention, ahead of a major TV interview today, comes as the referendum campaign gradually resumes following the shocking killing of Labour MP Jo Cox.

Both sides of the referendum battle shut down for two days after the shocking events on Thursday as a shattered Westminster was left reeling by the attack.

Mr Gove's intervention, in the Sunday Telegraph, urged voters to support democracy when they go to the polls on Thursday.





He told the paper: 'There are great things that Britain can do in the future as a progressive beacon.

'By voting Leave, we have that opportunity. 

'People should vote for democracy and Britain should vote for hope.'

Mr Gove said: 'I can't foretell the future but I don't believe that the act of leaving the European Union would make our economic position worse, I think it would make it better.' 

Amid reports some Tories are lining up Theresa May as a 'caretaker' replacement for David Cameron should he lose on Thursday, Mr Gove insisted the Prime Minister should stay on whatever the result.

He told the Telegraph: 'I absolutely think that David Cameron should stay, whatever the result of the referendum and I hope that he will stay for the full second term which he was elected to serve.





'I don't want to have anyone else as Prime Minister other than David Cameron and if people spend their time thinking about some of this stuff then they are getting in the way of two things: one a fair, open, fact-based referendum debate; and two, the Conservative government continuing afterwards in a stable and secure fashion.' 

In his own return to campaigning today, Mr Cameron warned the economy 'hangs in the balance' on Thursday.

Writing in the Sunday Telegraph, the Prime Minister said: 'If you're not sure, don't take the risk of leaving... If you don't know, don't go.'

He added: 'If we choose to go out of the EU, we will go out – with all of the consequences that will have for everyone in Britain.

'If we were to leave and it quickly turned out to be a big mistake, there wouldn't be a way of changing our minds and having another go.' 

 



 

 

 

 

