I'll apologise if we Brexit and there's a recession, Boris Johnson promises as he insists there is nothing to fear from quitting the EU 

2016-6-21

Boris Johnson today said he would apologise if he proved to be wrong about Brexit causing a recession but insisted he did not think it would happen 

Boris Johnson today said he would apologise publicly if Brexit caused a recession but insisted Britain had nothing to fear from quitting the EU.

The ex-London Mayor has rejected an economic consensus which has strongly warned against voting for Brexit on Thursday.

David Cameron and George Osborne made the extraordinary claim in the middle of the campaign that Britain would be voting for a 'DIY recession' if it backed Brexit.

Treasury forecasts suggest anything from a mild to a severe recession is possible after a Brexit vote - but found now evidence for the possibility Brexit would provoke growth because of the uncertainty it would cause.

Mr Johnson was challenged today during a live radio interview on whether he would be 'humble' enough to apologise if he won the referendum but proved to be wrong about the economy.

Answering questions on LBC, the Vote Leave champion said: 'Of course I will.'

He added: 'This is far more important any individual political career or politician. I don't think that London has anything to fear from coming out of the EU, this is the most extraordinary economy, and nor does Britain.

'Britain is the fifth biggest economy in the world, we have the opportunity to do new trade deals.

'When has our country ever gone wrong in believing in ourselves or our democratic institutions?'

Pressed again on an apology, Mr Johnson said: 'I've always been pretty humble about everything.

'I think the current gloom is actually being induced by Project Fear and the nonsense coming from the Remain campaign - I think they are talking the country down.'

Mr Johnson suggested Downing Street had been threatening businesses to ensure support for the Remain campaign.





He said: 'I do not wish in any way to be disparaging or critical of my friends in government, but it is well known that there is an operation in Downing Street.

'You will get a call from certain gentlemen and they will say 'We want to continue to have contracts with you', or 'It's very important we want to continue friendly relations', there's the honours system, all this kind of thing ... There's a bit of leaning on.

'And the heroism of people therefore like [Anthony] Bamford and [James] Dyson [who have come out for Leave] is very remarkable.'

Billionaire George Soros today forecast a 'black Friday' in the markets if Britain votes for Brexit in Thursday's referendum on EU membership 

With just two days until polls open, Mr Johnson acknowledged there were 'arguments for staying in', including a desire not to upset other European countries.

But he said: 'We can counter that argument by saying we are passionately committed to Europe, we are passionately committed to the security and defence of Europe.

'But I think the supranational system of the European Court of Justice, the Commission and the Parliament, is now out of control.' 

A new economic warning was issued today by the billionaire who famously bet against the pound and won in the 1992 crash, who said a Brexit vote on Thursday could produce a 'Black Friday' as markets react in horror to instability caused by the result.

George Soros forced then prime minister John Major to pull Britain out of the 'European Exchange Rate Mechanism' in 1992, sparking chaos in the markets on a day that went down in history as 'Black Wednesday'.

David Cameron and George Osborne were mocked after suggesting Brexit would trigger a 'DIY recession' for the first time in British history 

Mr Soros today claimed the collapse in the value of the pound on Friday could be even bigger if Britain votes for Brexit and he warned it would leave people poorer.

Currency and stock markets have been on a roller-coaster ride during the referendum campaigning, plunging over the past fortnight as a succession of polls showed a Brexit lead.

But as market hopes of a Remain vote were raised yesterday, the FTSE100 index soared and the pound had one of its strongest days since the 2008 financial crisis.

Chancellor George Osborne doubled down on his succession of grim economic warnings over Brexit last night as he refused to rule out that the stock market could even need to be suspended on Friday.

And Mr Osborne - who last week said an 'emergency budget' featuring punishing tax rises and spending cuts would be needed after Brexit - even claimed redundancies could be made by the end of the week.

Mr Soros' warning today could send new shudders through markets today as opinion polls show a race which is going down to the wire. 

  



