Cloud shaped like Britain is a ‘good omen’ for those wanting to leave the EU

2016-6-22

A PATRIOTIC mum believes a cloud shaped like Britain "standing alone and strong" could be an omen for Brexiteers on the eve of the EU referendum.

Nicola Holland, 43, gasped when she spotted the unusual formation above the garden of her home in Andover, Hants, days before voters go to the polls.

The grey mass appears to show the outline of mainland Great Britain as the sun begins to break through the dark clouds on the horizon.

Finance manager Nicola, who is voting for Brexit, said it could be seen as a "good omen".

Nicola said: "I went outside with my daughter Melanie and looked up and thought 'Oh my god' as soon as I saw the cloud in the sky – I noticed it straight away and we started taking pictures.

"I'm not a superstitious person but it would be nice to think of it as a good omen for the Leave campaign.

"You could definitely look at it as a sign of Britain standing stronger and alone in the future.

"It is a bit of a weird coincidence and as soon as I put it up online it, people started sharing it.

"Most people who have seen it have said that it is great and the reaction that I've got from the family is that it is pretty amazing."

Although Nicola insists she is not the most political person, she has been keen to read all the arguments for and against Britain remaining in the EU.

The mum, who lives with her painter and decorator husband Alan, 48, thinks Britain will end up staying in the EU despite the "inadequate" arguments from the Remain camp.

Nicola said: "I'm not hugely political but I thought I better take the time to read up about the referendum properly.

"I'm not a huge fan of change but even I think we should leave as the arguments to stay in seem completely inadequate. Every point can be torn apart. The leave argument is much more concrete.

You could definitely look at it as a sign of Britain standing stronger and alone in the future

"I know a lot of foreign people who live here and have come over from Eastern Europe and they are all incredibly hard workers shocked by those who just want to claim benefits.

"But with the world being as unsettled as it is who knows how many different nationalities we are going to get draining our resources?

"It scares me that if we stay in the EU our borders are going to remain so open.

"But unfortunately I think we will because I think those that want to stay are more likely to turnout to vote."

Pollsters say the result of tomorrow's In-Out referendum is on a knife-edge with up to a third of voters still undecided.

Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

 

