Nailed, the four big EU lies: Talks with Turkey will start in days, Brexit WON'T spark trade war say Germans, Brussels will NOT reform on open borders and deportation of jobless EU migrants a myth

2016-6-22

Four key claims made by the Remain camp were demolished last night in the final hours of the referendum battle.

As voters prepared to go to the polls in a knife-edge contest, Leave supporters said David Cameron's arguments on Turkey, trade, migration and welfare had fallen apart.

And in a final impassioned plea, Michael Gove declared today was 'D-Day' for current generations of Britons. He urged wavering voters not to flinch from regaining sovereignty from a Brussels machine that would leave their country poorer and less secure.

As voters prepared to go to the polls in a knife-edge contest, Leave supporters said David Cameron's arguments on Turkey, trade, migration and welfare had fallen apart. Pictured, the Prime Minister yesterday

Polls make the contest neck and neck. 'It's 50:50,' said Professor John Curtice – the only analyst to have predicted last year's election result.

Making his final arguments for Britain to remain in the EU, the Prime Minister suffered a series of body blows from events and interventions beyond his control:

Turkey's bid to join the EU has been a central issue in the campaign, amid concerns of an influx from a country with rock bottom wages.

Mr Cameron has backtracked on his pledge to be the 'strongest possible advocate' for Turkish membership of the EU, and insisted it will not happen 'until the year 3000'. But he has repeatedly refused to say he would veto Turkish accession.

And yesterday it emerged the EU will resume talks on Turkish membership next week, just days after the referendum.

Michael Gove declared today was 'D-Day' for current generations of Britons

John Major, who was campaigning alongside Mr Cameron yesterday, also appeared to suggest Turkey could join the EU far more quickly, saying: 'They are not going to get in in my judgment for one, two decades – perhaps not ever.'

Iain Duncan Smith, a Leave campaigner and another former Tory leader, said Sir John had let the cat out of the bag.

And he accused Mr Cameron of deliberate deception, saying: 'I'm afraid there is no conclusion you can draw from this, except that David Cameron is colluding with the EU and lying to the British people.'

Writing in the Daily Mail today, he adds: 'As much as the PM suggests otherwise, the issue of Turkey and the future of its 77million population ought to be in voters' minds today as they enter the polling booth.'

The Prime Minister used a final round of media interviews yesterday to claim reform to the EU's free movement rules would continue 'on Friday' if Britain votes Remain today. But within hours he had been undermined by Mr Juncker.

The president of the European Commission said Britain had already received 'the maximum' on offer.

Mr Cameron's claim that Brexit would spark a trade war that would wreck the economy was also undermined when the head of Germany's leading business organisation, the BDI, vowed to fight any attempt to impose tariffs.

Markus Kerber said it would be 'very, very foolish' for EU countries to try to use trade barriers to punish Britain for leaving – not least because Europe sells more to us than we do to them.

The Prime Minister also repeated his discredited claim that his reforms meant that the UK was now able to deport EU jobseekers if they failed to find work within six months.

Mr Cameron made the claim twice yesterday.

Jonathan Portes, an economist, accused the PM of 'repeating a known falsehood' – and said no one had been kicked out of Britain as a result of reforms.

In his final pitch to voters at a rally in Birmingham, the Prime Minister said: 'What this vote is all about, it's about our economy, it's about jobs, it's about livelihoods and futures, but it's also about the sort of country we want to be.

Boris Johnson gives a thumbs up as he leaves Selby, North Yorkshire, on the final day of campaigning

'I am passionate about this country, I am wildly patriotic about what we've done in the past and what we can do in the future. The sort of Great Britain I want, an even greater country doesn't walk away, it doesn't quit, it stays and it fights.'

Speculation was already swirling at Westminster about how MPs will react when the polls finally close at 10pm tonight.

A letter – signed by Mr Gove and Boris Johnson, along with scores of other Tory MPs – is expected to be released at 10pm calling for Mr Cameron to remain in office regardless of the result.

An exclusive survey for the Daily Mail and ITV News, gave the Remain camp a lead of six points, by 48 per cent to 42 per cent – 11 per cent of voters are still undecided.

Crucially, the Leave campaign's key message that now is the time for Britain to take control of its own destiny has had the biggest impact on the country's voters.

Some 44 per cent said it made them more likely to vote to quit the Brussels club – outstripping the claim by the Remain camp that leaving is a leap in the dark.

Downing Street stood by its claim that Turkey was not on course to join the EU. It said yesterday's announcement related to the opening of only one of more than 30 areas of negotiation that Turkey must conclude.

No 10 sources also argued Mr Juncker's comments were being misrepresented. They said he had been ruling out further negotiations in the event of Brexit – not if the UK votes to Remain.



LIE ONE: Giving jobless migrants the boot 'is a myth'

Former Work and Pensions Secretary Iain Duncan Smith, pictured, said Mr Cameron knew his claim about kicking out jobless migrants was 'not true'

By Jack Doyle, Political Correspondent for the Daily Mail 

David Cameron was last night accused of ‘treating voters with contempt’ after he repeated ‘false’ claims about kicking out jobless migrants.

Twice yesterday the Prime Minister said EU migrants have to leave the country if they don’t have a job after six months.

Mr Cameron has used the claim repeatedly during the referendum campaign despite it being rubbished both by the Leave camp and independent economists.

Last night, Jonathan Portes, an economist and former civil servant, said the PM was guilty of ‘repeating a known falsehood’.

He wrote on Twitter: ‘What can you say? Deliberately repeating a known falsehood. Treating voters with contempt. Let’s be clear. Vote to Remain is vote for free movement. Principle is not up for discussion.’

Mr Portes has said the number of people kicked out under the six-month rule has been ‘zero’.

And former Work and Pensions Secretary Iain Duncan Smith told the Mail: ‘The claim is not true, and he knows it. The truth is there is no mechanism, and no legal right to send people home if they do not have a job.

‘The European Union’s core principle of freedom of movement dictates that people are free not only to travel here, but to remain. And for as long as we remain in the EU we are powerless to do anything about it.

‘The only way to take back control of our borders, and introduce a fair immigration system, is to vote leave today.’

When he was in office, civil servants told Mr Duncan Smith the chances of removing an EU citizen from Britain if they do not get a job after six months was ‘close to zero’.

He said Whitehall officials told him migrants can easily get around the regulations, and that the Home Office admitted it did not have the staff or the capacity to enforce it.

Mr Cameron used the claim yesterday on Radio 4. Today presenter John Humphrys put to him that on benefits, his EU renegotiation ‘doesn’t add up to a row of beans’.

The PM replied: ‘Well it does. What it means is that if people come here they can’t claim unemployment benefit, if they don’t have a job after six months they have to leave and if they do work they have to work for four years before they get full access to our welfare system.’

Again, later in the day, Mr Cameron told LBC radio: ‘If you vote Remain then we get the changes that I have negotiated and that means that if somebody comes to Britain from the European Union, they can’t claim unemployment benefit.

‘If they haven’t got a job after six months they have to leave.’

Mr Cameron claimed credit for the rule change, saying it was secured as part of his renegotiation ‘deal’.

But last night the Home Office said the six-months rule was introduced on January 1, 2014.

Mr Duncan Smith was in charge of implementing the rule change as Work and Pensions Secretary.

But he said the Home Office told him they were unable to force anyone to leave as a result of not having secured a job.

Vote Leave argue that as well as there being no mechanism for monitoring whether or not jobseekers remain in the UK after this period has elapsed, EU law forbids systematic checks on whether EU citizens are lawfully residing in the UK.

The European Court of Justice has ruled jobseekers cannot be removed irrespective of how long they have been here if they can show they are ‘continuing to seek employment and that has genuine chances of being engaged’.

The Home Office was unable to provide a figure for the number of EU migrants removed under the rule.

LIE TWO: Turkey - now an ex-Premier lets the cat out of the bag

By Daniel Martin, Chief Political Correspondent for the Daily Mail 

The Prime Minister is ‘lying to the British people’, it was said last night, after Sir John Major suggested Turkey could join the EU in as little as a decade.

Iain Duncan Smith, the Leave campaigner who resigned as Work and Pensions Secretary earlier this year, said former PM Sir John, a staunch Remain backer, had ‘let the cat out of the bag’.

It also emerged yesterday that membership talks between the EU and Turkey are due to be reopened next Thursday – a week after the referendum.

The pro-Brexit camp has highlighted the possibility of Turkish entry to the EU, saying it could open the doors to hundreds of thousands of workers coming to Britain under free movement rules if we vote to Remain.

The Prime Minister is ‘lying to the British people’, it was said last night, after Sir John Major suggested Turkey could join the EU in as little as a decade. Pictured, Mr Cameron with Sir John and Harriet Harman

David Cameron claimed earlier this week that membership was not on the cards in the next few decades and that, at current rates, it would not take place until the year 3000. But yesterday, standing alongside Mr Cameron at a Remain campaign event, Sir John said he did not believe that Turkey would join the EU as early as 2026 – but indicated it was a possibility.

‘I find it extraordinary that people should point to Turkey, and suggest that 77million Turks are suddenly going to descend and take all of our hospital places and all our school places and all our local authority dwellings,’ he said. ‘They have been negotiating for 30 years without getting in. They are not going to get in, in my judgment, for one, two decades – perhaps not ever.

‘Even if it happened in some far distant future, what obscenity it is to suggest all 77million Turks are suddenly going to say, “Let’s go to the United Kingdom, the national minimum wage has risen by 50p, let’s get there as fast as we can.”

‘If they do happen to say that, let me just mention to them in advance that they would actually earn more in France or in Germany than they would here.’

Yesterday the Prime Minister repeated his prediction that Turkey may not be able to join the EU until the year 3000.

Asked about Leave warnings of a potential early accession for Turkey, the PM told LBC radio: ‘The issue simply isn’t going to arise. This is the reddest of red herrings. At the current rate of progress, Turkey could qualify to join in about the year 3000.’ EU leaders pledged in March to speed up Turkey’s long-stalled membership talks as part of an accord on tackling migration.

Mr Duncan Smith said: ‘David Cameron has repeatedly claimed that Turkey is not going to join the EU, despite it being Government policy. Now the Turkish government has confirmed that he is the “chief supporter” of their bid to join the EU.

‘Cameron also said that Turkey will not join until the year 3000, but Sir John Major has let the cat out of the bag – Turkey could be in the EU in ten years’ time.

‘I’m afraid there is no conclusion you can draw from this except that David Cameron is colluding with the EU and lying to the British people. Families are suffering the consequences of uncontrolled migration.

‘With five countries lining up to join the EU – Albania, Serbia, Montenegro, Macedonia and Turkey – this problem can only get worse.’

Last night, the Turkish president’s chief adviser, Ilnur Cevik, told BBC2’s Newsnight that Mr Cameron had changed his mind to Turkey’s membership of the EU for political purposes. ‘We thought that Mr Cameron was our chief supporter in our quest for EU membership,’ he said. ‘We are really, really flabbergasted.’

LIE THREE: We must not block EU trade, says top German boss

German industrialist Markus Kerber, pictured, dismissed warnings of a post-Brexit trade war

By Jason Groves, Deputy Political Editor for the Daily Mail 

Germany's leading industrialist yesterday dismissed warnings of a post-Brexit trade war, saying the EU would be ‘very, very foolish’ to impose tariffs on the UK.

David Cameron and George Osborne have repeatedly issued doom-laden warnings that British exporters will face a wall of tariffs if Britain leaves the EU, potentially costing jobs.

But Markus Kerber, head of the influential BDI which represents German industry, said that made no sense. Mr Kerber told the BBC’s World Service: ‘Imposing trade barriers, imposing protectionist measures between our two countries – or between the two political centres, the EU on the one hand and the UK on the other – would be a very, very foolish thing in the 21st Century.

‘The BDI would urge politicians on both sides to come up with a trade regime that enables us to uphold and maintain the levels of trade we have.’

Boris Johnson welcomed the intervention, saying it was clear that EU trade partners would be ‘desperate’ for a deal with Britain. The former London Mayor told a BBC debate on Tuesday night that EU countries would be ‘insane’ to erect trade barriers against the UK if it pulled out of the EU, as they sell far more to us than we do to them.

Responding to Mr Kerber’s comments yesterday, Mr Johnson said: ‘After the incessant doom-mongering of the In campaign, we now hear the truth from the “voice of German industry” – they would be desperate for free trade after we vote Leave.

‘They would be damaging their own commercial interests if they didn’t. That’s why EU politicians would be banging down the door for a trade deal on Friday.’

The assumption that British firms would face tariff barriers has been central to a series of lurid warnings from the Treasury and other bodies that leaving the EU would damage the economy. But Britain’s trade deficit with the EU – the difference between goods imported and exported – hit a record £23.9billion in the first three months of this year, suggesting EU firms would suffer massively in any trade war.

Former Tory Cabinet minister John Redwood said: ‘They know they sell twice as many goods to us as we do to them. Who is going to want to wreck that?’

One of Britain’s leading entrepreneurs, Sir James Dyson, warned that remaining in the EU ‘would be an act of national self-harm’.

LIE FOUR: You won't get more borders reform - EU chief says PM got 'maximum deal'

By John Stevens for the Daily Mail 

Britain will not gain any more reform of immigration rules whether Remain or Leave wins, the EU’s top bureaucrat warned last night.

Jean-Claude Juncker flatly rejected making further changes to freedom of movement rules that enable the EU’s 500million citizens to come to the UK.

The European Commission president said David Cameron had been given the ‘maximum’ reform he could get in his widely-derided deal with Brussels.

Jean-Claude Juncker flatly rejected making further changes to freedom of movement rules that enable the EU’s 500million citizens to come to the UK. Pictured, Mr Juncker with Mr Cameron

The Prime Minister has been telling voters he will be able to reform EU migration rules if they choose to vote Remain.

The agreement by EU leaders made some changes to benefit entitlements for migrants but did not touch freedom of movement rules.

Mr Juncker, a former prime minister of Luxembourg, said yesterday: ‘There will be no kind of any negotiation’, adding: [Mr Cameron] got the maximum he could receive, and we gave the maximum we could give, so there will be no kind of renegotiation on the agreement we found in February or as far as any kind of treaty negotiation is concerned. Out is out.’

Earlier in the day, Mr Cameron had said: in an interview: ‘Reform doesn’t end on Friday. The only way it ends is if we leave.’ Asked whether he could guarantee he would push for tougher migration controls, he said: ‘Yes of course. This is an ongoing process.’

Justice Secretary Michael Gove told voters last night said: ‘If you vote to stay there is no prospect of getting any reform from the EU ever again.

‘The Prime Minister tried to get reforms earlier this year but the EU did not listen. The EU cannot and will not give the British people the change that they want.’

Boris Johnson, the former London mayor, said: ‘I was very struck to see what President Juncker said – that if Britain thought it was going to get any more change from the EU we had another think coming.’

Mr Johnson added: ‘The idea that we can do better by staying in the EU and fighting for change is, I’m afraid, a sham, a snare and a delusion.’

Actress Liz Hurley was leaving little to the imagination yesterday... as she encouraged Britain to vote Leave.

She urged her social media followers to go for Brexit by releasing a saucy picture of her smiling with just a Union Jack cushion to cover her modesty.

The star wrote alongside the image: ‘Vote tomorrow – whatever your persuasion. I’m for #Brexit & promise to neither gloat nor whinge. But VOTE!’

Liz Hurley urged her social media followers to go for Brexit by releasing a saucy picture of her smiling with just a Union Jack cushion to cover her modesty

Miss Hurley, 51, uploaded the image, taken as a cover shot for the Mail on Sunday’s You Magazine in 2011, to her Twitter and Instagram accounts where it was quickly ‘liked’ and retweeted thousands of times.

Some jokingly commented that the cheeky photo of the former model alone was enough to make them vote Leave.

On Twitter, one user said: ‘I would say this is the ultimate campaign poster.’

Another posted: ‘Thanks Liz, I was going to vote remain, but seeing you with that cushion, I am for Brexit. I am born anew in your wisdom.’

IAIN DUNCAN SMITH: What a cynical exercise in hiding the truth

Today, the country has the chance to return the Government of Britain back to the UK. More than that, we have the chance to end the corruption of our politics.

This corruption of the democratic process is best exemplified by how our leaders have reacted to Turkey’s wish to join the EU.

Although he now claims there is no chance of Turkey joining (allowing its 77 million citizens free movement to the UK), why did the Prime Minister refuse on FOUR occasions to say he’d use the British veto to stop it happening? There are several other contradictions.

Iain Duncan Smith: 'The country has the chance to return the Government of Britain back to the UK'

If Turkey won’t join ‘until about the year 3000’ (as the PM has said), why is there a special team at the British embassy in Ankara helping Turkey to join?

And why are hundreds of millions of pounds of British taxpayers’ money being spent to support the accession of Turkey (as well as Albania, Serbia, Macedonia and Montenegro) to the EU?

Equally, why are Brussels officials busy negotiating key financial aspects of Turkey’s accession before Christmas?

All this confirms the fact that Turkey’s accession to the European Union is both British and EU policy.

Furthermore, the PM knows that the deal struck with the Ankara government earlier this year to stop migrants using Turkey as a jumping-off point to pour into Greece – and thus enable them to travel to any other EU country – was done in exchange for the Turkish government getting £4.6billion in aid (£1billion from the UK), visa-free access for Turks to mainland Europe and accelerated entry to the EU.

The Prime Minister is also fully aware that if we try to pull out of the deal, Turkey would inevitably start to allow migrants travelling to EU countries from its shores again – creating similar chaos to that which occurred last year.

The truth is that Turkey has the European Union over a barrel and the British Government knows it.

Most cynically, the Brussels Commission has been holding back announcements about Turkey until after the UK referendum on membership of the EU. But yesterday the fact was leaked that it will start negotiations on Turkey’s entry into the EU a week today – after the British people have voted.

As much as the PM suggests otherwise, the issue of Turkey and the future of its 77 million population ought to be in voters’ minds today as they enter the polling booth.

