ANOTHER poll gives Brexit a six-point lead with just a week to go as Boris denies he's fishing to be Prime Minister

2016-6-16

Boris Johnson today denied he was bidding to become Prime Minister in the aftermath of the referendum as more polls showed Vote Leave ahead.

With just one week until the historic referendum finally takes place, the latest surveys matched a string of polls over the past week to have shown big leads for Leave.

Despite the Remain campaign scrambling to halt an apparent slide in support, the new snapshot of public opinion by Ipsos-Mori indicated the momentum continued to be with Brexit supporters as Leave led by six points.

Survation released another survey showed Leave up seven points on 45 per cent, leading Remain on 42 per cent, down two. Excluding 'don't knows' Brexit leads 52-48 with a week to go.

On a visit to a fish firm in Lowestoft, Suffolk, the ex-mayor of London gutted a fish for the cameras before dismissing suggestions he could be in No 10 within weeks.

Boris Johnson went in search of inspiration today as he was told he should be prime minister on a campaign visit to a fish firm in Suffolk today 

The new opinion poll from Ipsos-Mori for the Evening Standard made grim reading for David Cameron's Remain campaign as it revealed another big lead for Leave 

David Cameron - due to campaign in Gibraltar today - is widely expected to announce his resignation if today's poll for the Evening Standard is borne out at the ballot box

On his visit, Mr Johnson declared 'they're pinching our fish' as he posed for photos while holding a live lobster, before then attempting to fillet a salmon.

Speaking at the Sam Cole Food Group to people involved in the fishing industry, Mr Johnson said he is campaigning for Britain to 'take back control' of its waters and ensure North Sea fish is more fairly distributed.

The former London mayor said: 'We think we'd get more boats coming to Lowestoft.'

He added: 'We hope that carries your core support.'

John Knights, who has a fishing boat in Lowestoft docks, said: 'As long as you end up prime minister.'

But Mr Johnson replied: 'No, that's not going to happen.'

Speaking after Mr Johnson's visit, Mr Knights added: 'I'm really worried about this country.'

Asked if he hopes Mr Johnson would be PM if the UK leaves the EU, Mr Knights replied: 'Yeah I do. That man in charge - he's got a pair of balls.

'I don't think he knows much about the (fishing) job, but I believe he really does care about Britain and I believe the man has got some guts to run this country - not just the fishing.

'This country is getting in a mess.'

Mr Johnson grappled with a live lobster on his visit to the fish factory to make a rallying cry to protect the fishing industry by voting for Brexit next week

David Cameron today appeared with Jeremy Clarkson, right, and James May, centre, in a bid to boost his flagging campaign in the final week 

Mr Johnson, who was joined by Conservative ministers Penny Mordaunt and George Eustice, was also presented with a 'Save Our Soles' T-shirt.

He joked: 'You've got to make sure you don't say that too fast.'

The T-shirt also says: 'EU destroyed our fishing industry - vote leave.'

The details of today's opinion poll made grim reading for the Remain campaign.

Fewer than one in five people believe the main Treasury campaign claim that households would be £4,300 after a Brexit vote.

By contrast, almost half of people do believe the controversial Leave campaign figure that Britain would get back control of £350million a week after Brexit.

Both numbers have been dismissed by independent experts but the gulf in trust between the two campaigns will send new shudders through the Remain camp. 



In other findings, Ipsos-Mori found more people think they would be better off in five years after Brexit than if Britain stays in.

Immigration is now the most important issue to voters seven days out - a sharp turn around from earlier in the campaign when the economy dominated. 

Mr Johnson was told by workers at the plant that he had the 'balls' to take over at No 10 if Leave wins the referendum next week 

