We can't have ANY limit on free movement in Europe claims Jeremy Corbyn as he blasts the Government for failing to make sure communities can cope 

2016-6-19

Jeremy Corbyn today admitted he did not think there was a limit on free movement of people within the EU.

The comments, just four days before the referendum, will frustrate many on the Remain side determined to shift the argument to the economy.

Vote Leave immediately seized on the remarks as evidence Remain campaigners had 'no answers' on how to control immigration numbers. 

Mr Corbyn has argued before Government has responsibility for mitigating the impact of free movement by ensure enough services are provided to communities.  

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, pictured on today's Andrew Marr programme, said said he did not think it was possible to cap free movement within the single market of the European Union

Appearing on the BBC's Andrew Marr Show, Mr Corbyn was asked directly whether he thought there should be an upper limit on the numbers coming to the UK.

Mr Corbyn blamed Eurozone austerity for driving up migration across Europe - and condemned the European Central Bank for its treatment of Greece. 

He said: 'I don't think you can have one while you have the free movement of labour, and the free movement of labour means that you have to balance the economy.

'So you have to improve living standards and conditions and so that means the EU's appalling treatment of Greece is a problem.

'If you deliberately lower living standards and increase poverty in south eastern Europe, then you're bound to have a flow of people looking for somewhere to go.

'Surely the issue is an anti-austerity, growth package all across Europe rather than this.'

Mr Corbyn said pressures caused by free movement were the fault of government failing to address rising demand for services.

He said: 'It's a failure of our government to properly fund local authorities, it's a failure of our government to provide housing for people, it's a failure of our government for attacking school budgets.

'It's that that is the problem and they should turn their anger against this government and the austerity that's been put forward by Cameron and Osborne over the past six years.'

Mr Corbyn attacked the European Union for imposing austerity on countries such as Greece and said new economic policies were important to ease migration across the continent 

Mr Corbyn, who has made the argument about immigration in the past, said it was not true to say there was 'uncontrolled immigration'.

He insisted: 'There is no uncontrolled immigration, there is free movement of people across the EU that goes both ways - more than two million British people are living in Europe.

'There is controlled immigration from outside Europe.

'I represent a very mixed constituency where there are great problems of getting family reunions and there are not equal rights for people coming in from Europe - they don't get benefits and they don't get access to benefits. It's not totally uncontrolled.'

Vote Leave chairwoman Gisela Stuart said: 'The IN campaign have no answers on how we can control immigration if we stay in the EU.

'They have no plan for how we will fund the NHS so it can cope with the extra pressures that staying in the EU will create.

'They have no plan for where we will build the extra houses and they have no plan to help people who will see further pressure on their pay packets.

'The only way to get a fairer immigration policy and to bring in an Australian style points-based system is to Vote Leave on 23 June.' 



In a separate interview yesterday, London Mayor Sadiq Khan also said there should be no upper limit.

The comments cap a week of chaos among Labour ranks over the issue. Shadow chancellor John McDonnell said the party would ‘look again’ at free movement of labour.

Deputy leader Tom Watson said the party would have to make the case to revise the EU edict. He added that while he backed In, the issue of uncontrolled migration was ‘coming up on the doorstep’ and people needed reassurance.

Ukip’s Mike Hookem said Labour’s policy on immigration was ‘farcical’ and ‘they do not have an answer to people’s genuine concerns’.

It came as George Osborne was accused of being ‘wrong’ on immigration by economist Jonathan Portes. The Chancellor told ITV he’d ‘seen absolutely no evidence migration levels will fall’ in the event of Brexit.

But a report by Mr Portes’s think-tank NIESR worked on the basis a Leave vote would see net migration from the EU fall by two thirds compared with a Remain vote.

