UK population soars to record 65.1m high fuelled by immigration

2016-6-23

SKY-HIGH immigration saw Britain’s population explode by half a million to a record 65.1 million last year – equal to adding a city the size of Liverpool.

The number of people living in the UK rose by 513,273 – one person almost every minute.

And net international immigration accounted for two-thirds or 335,600 of the rise.

 

It meant migrants alone added a country the size of Iceland to Britain’s population in 2015.

Brexit bosses the staggering figures proved why voters needed to vote to “take back control” at the ballot box given forecasts of an even bigger rise in the number of EU migrants looking to settle on these shores.

Vote Leave chief Matthew Elliott said: “In the last ten years as many people as live in Birmingham have moved here from another EU country.

“That puts a huge strain on our NHS and our schools. If we Vote Leave, we can take back control and introduce a new Australian-style points-based immigration system.”

Migration Watch said Britain’s population was on track to hit at least 75 million by 2036 – far ahead of the current ONS predictions of the 2040s.

Alp Mehmet, Migration Watch chairman said: “These figures confirm that our population is growing by around half a million annually.

“At this rate the UK population will increase by ten million over the next two decades and continue to go up. Seventy five per cent of this increase will be due to migration, which is now at record levels.

“As the population grows beyond our capability to provide for it, pressure on housing, schooling, healthcare and transport will become ever more critical.

“This is unacceptable to the majority of the public who wise to see net migration reduced.”

Last year’s population increase is THREE TIMES the rise recorded 20 years and follows the huge expansion in the EU during the 2000s.

The ONS said ‘natural’ growth in Britain’s population – births minus deaths – was the lowest for almost nine years in 2015 after a flu outbreak at the start of last year.

The boffins added that a huge part of the population growth – 469,700 - came in England.

Within England and Wales, the biggest shift in ‘internal migration’ came with people heading to the south-west.

London saw a ‘net loss’ in population of 77,500 as more people in every age group except 21 to 28 leaving the capital than arriving. Nearly four in ten of all migrants headed to the capital.

Scotland’s population rose by 25,400 to 5.4m, Wales saw a 7,100 increase to 3.1m while the number of people living in Northern Ireland jumped 11,100 to 1.9m.

