œVoting to leave the EU will 'neutralise' extremists who try to exploit immigration fears, Boris Johnson insists

2016-6-19

Voting for Brexit would 'neutralise' extremists who try to exploit people's fears over mass immigration, Boris Johnson has insisted.

The former London mayor spoke out as supporters of cutting ties with Brussels condemned a controversial Ukip referendum poster.

Nigel Farage unveiled the poster - which featured the headline 'Breaking Point' over an image of refugees walking into Europe through Slovenia - on Thursday just hours before Labour MP Jo Cox was shot dead and the referendum battle was suspended.

Boris Johnson told a rally in London today that Brexit was the best way to 'neutralise' extremists spreading fear about immigration 

Justice Secretary Michael Gove today revealed he 'shuddered' when he saw it, while House of Commons Leader Chris Grayling said it was 'wrong'. 



And speaking at a rally in London today, Mr Johnson argued that leaving the EU would help silence those who 'play politics' with immigration. 

'I'm not only pro-immigration, I'm pro-immigrants,' he said.

'And I am in favour of an amnesty of illegal immigrants who have been here for more than 12 years, unable to contribute to this economy, unable to pay taxes, unable to take proper part in society.

'I'll tell you why. Because it is the humane thing to do. It is the economically rational thing to do.

'And it means taking back control of a system that is at the moment completely out of control.

'If we take back control of our immigration system with an Australian-style points based system, we'll be dealing fairly and justly with every part of the world and we will be neutralising people in this country and across Europe who wish to play politics with immigration and who are opposed to immigrants.

'That is the way forward. To neutralise the extremists.'

Mr Johnson, who was celebrating his birthday today, was address an audience of a few hundred people alongside Mr Gove and employment minister Priti Patel and Labour's Kate Hoey.

Mr Gove said leaving the EU will not just be a 'vote of confidence' for Britain but will show solidarity with those in struggling economies such as Greece, Spain and Portugal who, he claimed, have suffered because of the EU.

He said: 'The people who lead the European Union have never said sorry, never apologised, never admitted that they've got anything wrong.

Labour MP Jo Cox, who was killed last week

'Why? Because they believe that they can ride roughshod over expressions of popular opinion and concern.'

He added: 'We'll be saying that they're running the countries of Europe into the ground.'

Ms Hoey warned that the EU was 'no longer a social Europe' and was instead a 'Europe for the elite'.

She said: 'As a Labour MP, I feel very strongly that (the EU) has been working more and more in the interests of the big banks, the big corporations.

'It's in the interests of those people to stop the small business people, to stop them from being able to compete with them.

'That is why working class people will vote leave.'

Campaigning resumed today after being put on hold in the aftermath of the fatal attack on Mrs Cox, a strong supporter of Britain staying in the EU.

The man charged with her murder, Thomas Mair, gave his name as 'death to traitors, freedom for Britain' when he appeared in court on Saturday.

A Survation poll for The Mail On Sunday found Remain had opened up a three-point lead on 45 per cent to 42 per cent - reversing the firm's findings from Thursday.

Another showed the two sides are level while a third has voters saying they are more enthusiastic about leaving the EU than staying.

Pollsters have suggested that the apparent surge for Remain could be down to undecided voters plumping for the status quo as the crucial ballot looms.

But Mr Murrison complained that pro-EU figures may be exploiting the tragedy to bolster support for ties with Brussels.

'Remain side spinning Jo Cox murder for partisan advantage in #EUReferendum shameful,' he wrote on Twitter.

Within hours the MP had deleted the post and replaced it with one that said: 'Can both sides in this horrible #EUReferendum campaign & the press use the last few days to put case squarely, honestly and decently?'

Pro-EU figures have stressed the need for unity and condemned the tone of the campaign in the wake of the killing.

In a letter to the Observer today, Tony Blair, ex-deputy PM Nick Clegg and Conservative grandee Lord Heseltine say the vote is about 'what sort of country we are'.



The message - which was highlighted on Twitter by David Cameron - said: 'There is something more fundamental at stake: the sort of country we are. A democracy where disagreements do not degenerate into incivility and where debate is not used to divide our communities.

'We have a chance as a country to reject division, isolationism and blame. To choose co-operation. For the future of our children, that is a chance we must take.'



Tory MP Andrew Murrison tweeted that Remain supporters were 'spinning' Jo Cox's killing, before deleting the post and urging both sides to put their cases 'squarely, honestly and decently'

Mr Cameron has also posted about a strongly pro-EU article Mrs Cox wrote days before her death, stating.

Alongside a link to the piece, Mr Cameron wrote: 'Jo Cox's strong voice in the campaign to remain in the EU will be badly missed.' 

Brexit campaigners Michael Gove and Chris Grayling today joined condemnation of a poster unveiled by Ukip leader Nigel Farage, depicting a queue of migrants on the Slovenian border and the message 'Breaking point'.

Mr Gove said the image had made him shudder, but insisted it was right to raise other concerns about our inability to control our own borders. 

At a rally in London today, Boris Johnson insisted voting to cut ties with Brussels would 'neutralise' extremists who scaremonger about immigration.

'I'm not only pro-immigration, I'm pro-immigrants,' the former London mayor said.

'And I am in favour of an amnesty of illegal immigrants who have been here for more than 12 years, unable to contribute to this economy, unable to pay taxes, unable to take proper part in society.

'I'll tell you why. Because it is the humane thing to do. It is the economically rational thing to do.

'And it means taking back control of a system that is at the moment completely out of control.

'If we take back control of our immigration system with an Australian-style points based system, we'll be dealing fairly and justly with every part of the world and we will be neutralising people in this country and across Europe who wish to play politics with immigration and who are opposed to immigrants.

'That is the way forward. To neutralise the extremists.'

 

 

