'Get out ASAP' EU tells Britain to hurry up and LEAVE after landmark Brexit vote

2016-06-24

GETTY

While the landmark decision was taken by Brits in yesterday's EU Referendum – with an unexpected victory for the Leave camp – the process of quitting the union could take up to two years.

But while British Government begins producing a timetable for exit in the wake Prime Minister David Cameron's shocking announcement he will be stepping down.

Senior EU represenatives said the UK should implement Brexit "as soon as possible, however painful that process may be" warning "any delay would unnecessarily prolong uncertainty".

“We now expect the United Kingdom Government to give effect to this decision of the British people as soon as possible, however painful that process may be”

David Cameron has said there will be no rush to begin the formal withdrawal, saying no decision on invoking the Clause 50 process would be taken for at least three months.

Some senior pro-Brexit campaigners have suggested it may not have to be invoked at all, seeking instead less formal negotiations over the future relationship with Brussels.

But, in a joint statement, European Council president Donald Tusk, European Parliament president Martin Schulz, Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte, holder of the rotating presidency of the Council of the EU, and European Commission president Jean-Claude Juncker made clear they expected swift progress

They said: "In a free and democratic process, the British people have expressed their wish to leave the European Union. We regret this decision but respect it.

"We now expect the United Kingdom Government to give effect to this decision of the British people as soon as possible, however painful that process may be.

"Any delay would unnecessarily prolong uncertainty. We have rules to deal with this in an orderly way.

"Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union sets out the procedure to be followed if a member state decides to leave the European Union.

"We stand ready to launch negotiations swiftly with the United Kingdom regarding the terms and conditions of its withdrawal from the European Union."

They said EU law "continues to apply to the full, to and in the United Kingdom, until it is no longer a member" and that the concessions agreed as part of Mr Cameron's renegotiation would be abandoned.

They said they hoped the UK would remain "a close partner of the European Union also in the future".However, they added EU would "stand strong and uphold the EU's core values of promoting peace and the well-being of its peoples" as a 27-nation bloc



Questions remain over how the Brexit will impact Brits and currently the British Pound is in freefall as the markets react badly to the Leave vote.

There is already speculation as to the future of the EU as far-right leaders make controversial comments about their status in the bloc, and at home the starting gun for the next Prime Minister has been fired.

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn could be ousted from his position after the Remain campaign's failure, and White House wannabe presidential candidate Donald Trump praised the Brexit on his visit to Scotland.

