HEATWAVE: Tropical blast to bring 30C temperatures as Brits cast EU referendum vote

2016-06-20

GETTY

A blast of tropical air from the Continent is poised to arrive just as the nation decides whether to stay in or out of Europe – which is expected to boost voter turn out as well as tans.

Referendum voters face a muggy day at the polling stations with warm weather forecast though the weekend.

But dark clouds are gathering over the forcast for Glastonbury festival with thunder storms predicted to plague Somerset.

James Madden, forecaster for Exacta Weather, said thermometers are likely to hit the 30C mark by Thursday.

GETTY\ TABATHA FIREMAN

“Temperatures could approach the 30C mark in parts before the end of the week with other areas seeing temperatures in the mid 20C”

However he warned the burst of extreme heat carried by unstable air from the Continent will trigger fierce thunderstorms.

He said: "The week ahead will see gradually rising temperatures, it will feel very warm and rather muggy from Wednesday.

"Temperatures could approach the 30C mark in parts before the end of the week with other areas seeing temperatures in the mid 20Cs.

"However, a number of weather fronts and low pressure areas will keep the theme unsettled in places despite the much warmer weather.

"There is a risk for some widespread and vigorous thunderstorm activity to develop within this period."

"All in all, we are now only days away from our next heatwave that is likely to bring the hottest temperatures of the year."

The Met Office said the freak hot spell will be triggered by steamy tropical Continental air being dragged across the UK.

Its experts say the jet stream has picked up strength since last week allowing any rain to move quickly across the country.

The sluggish nature of the jet last week was largely the driver for slow-moving bands of torrential rain which sparked floods in parts of Britain.

GETTY

Met Office forecaster Mark Wilson said: "We have warm air pushing up from the Continent on Thursday into Friday, at the moment we are not sure how far north this will reach.

"But certainly for the south it will be much warmer, although rather than blue skies and sunshine we are looking at warm, muggy weather.

"On Thursday the south is looking very warm and humid with temperatures in the high 20Cs.

"There is the potential for it to become very warm although it is going to be a brief spell of warm weather."

These highs were outlawed in May under the Psychoactive Substance Act.

