Gary Lineker and Michael Owen react to Britain LEAVING the EU

2016-06-24

Those who backed Brexit are celebrating an unprecedented win with a 51.9% majority, it was revealed early this morning (June 24).

In the wake of the result, David Cameron has resigned as Prime Minister, saying: "I think the country requires fresh leadership."

He continued: "I do not think I can be the captain to take the country to its next destination."

Brits who are asking themselves what will happen next now that the UK has voted Leave can read about it here.

  GETTY

Keep seeing words like catastrophic on my timeline - so why did vote out win?

Nigel Farage – a key supporter of the Leave campaign – feared “Remain would edge it” at the start of the night.

Howver large turnouts – especially among Eurosceptics – swung the vote by over one million ballot papers.

Brit icons have taken to the internet to share their celebration and disappointment, with Farage himself tweeting: “We’ve got out country back. Thanks to all of you. #IndependenceDay.”

This man could be the new PM. We'll just let that sink in... pic.twitter.com/BhUm2LxaL7

 GETTY

Footie pundit Gary Lineker was diplomatic about the result and said: "It's not a time for triumphalism. Not a time for division. Not a time for hatred. It's a time for change. A time for calm. A time in history."

Former England footballer Michael Owen was also shocked and tweeted: "Didn't expect to wake up to that news. #EUref #Sceptical."

Meanwhile, prominent Remain campaigner J.K. Rowling led the celeb world in tweeting her despair.

Vote from your head. Vote from your heart. Just make sure you get out and use your vote. It matters. #EUreferendum

 PA

 GETTY

Former Lib Dem leader Paddy Ashdown was in agreement and tweeted: “God help our country.”

Piers Morgan, however, focused on the surprise nature of the result, saying: “Pollsters knew nothing, City knew nothing, bookies knew nothing. #EUreferendum.”

Making his victory speech, Ukip leader Farage said: “Decent, ordinary people have won. We have given ourselves a chance to rejoin the world in the 21st century.”

The British public also logged on this morning to give their opinion on the vote.

 GETTY

One Twitter user considered the far-reaching consequences of the decision, saying: “The #Brexit reminds me of a divorce; the children pay the price.”

However, another user was in favour of the win and tweeted: “Happy Independence Day! #BrexitWins.”

While not everyone may agree with the outcome of the referendum, there are certainly positives.

One online user reasoned: “On a positive note, I might be able to buy that house in Chelsea after all. #BrexitWins.”

