EU Vote: Nigel Farage says it 'looks like Remain has won' as polls close

2016-06-24

  GETTY/REUTERS

The prominent Brexit campaigner said his party will be going nowhere even if Remain wins the vote.

But he said data collated by Vote Leave suggests that "Remain will edge it". 

But Mr Farage has come out fighting since, adding: "Win or lose this battle, we will win this war, we will get this country back, we will get our independence back and we will get our borders back."

No results have been declared, with the first expected at about midnight. 

YouGov's latest poll shows a 52-48 win for Remain, while already the pound has surged as the likelihood of a Remain win grows.

Mr Farage said: "It’s been an extraordinary referendum campaign, turnout looks to be exceptionally high and looks like Remain will edge it.

The letter was signed by 84 MPs, two-thirds of those who publicly supported the Vote Leave Campaign list attached pic.twitter.com/CvKYCWyZJz

"UKIP and I are going nowhere and the party will only continue to grow stronger in the future."

But a spokesman for the UKIP leader, speaking to Bloomberg, has since said Mr Farage's comments do not constitute a concession.

He added: "He never conceded. He looked at the prevailing weather and was honest. We're not saying it's over. We haven't had a single vote counted."

Mr Farage said the prediction of defeat is based on "what I know from some of my friends in the financial markets who have done some big polling".

And, speaking at a Vote Leave party, he said his earlier comments were "not a concession". 

Labour's Chuka Umunna said he still believed the outcome would be "close" but said he was "reasonably confident that Remain gets a result".

Meanwhile prime minister David Cameron has thanked people who voted for Britain to stay in the EU.

 

He posted on Facebook: "Thank you everyone who voted to keep Britain stronger, safer and better off in Europe – and to the thousands of Remain campaigners around the UK."

Meanwhile 84 Tory MPs, two-thirds of whom back Leave, have written a letter asking Mr Cameron to stay in Number 10 regardless of the outcome.

Poole MP Robert Syms tweeted a picture, with signatories including prominent Brexit campaigners such as Jacob Rees-Mogg, Priti Patel and Andrea Leadsom.

A Leave win has been widely perceived to cast the future of the PM in doubt.

Turnout in Gibraltar, meanwhile, where the polls shut an hour earlier because of the time difference, is 86.4%, a record high.

