EU migrants face uncertain future as Britain backs Brexit in EU referendum

2016-06-24

  GETTY

There are some 3.3million non-British EU citizens living in the UK whose destiny now hangs in the balance.

Some have speculated that, however rough the breakup, both sides will see the sense in sorting the rights of existing residents.

Yet others, including Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy, had warned of dire consequences ahead of the result.

 “British citizens would lose their right to move freely”

David Cameron, who today announced his resignation as PM, tried to allay the fears of EU migrants currently in the UK.

There would be no "immediate" changes for those living here or those Brits living in the EU, he announced.

He said: "I would also reassure Britons living in European countries and European citizens living here there will be no immediate changes in your circumstances.

"There will be no initial change in the way our people can travel, in the way our goods can move or the way our services can be sold."

 GETTY

But Mr Rajoy, said more 100,000 Spaniards living and working in the UK would lose their right to be there.

He added that some 400,000 British citizens living in Spain would also lose their right to stay in his country.

"It would be very negative for British citizens," he said. "The EU is based, ever since its foundation, on the principles of freedom of movement of people, goods, services and capitals.

"Leaving the EU would mean that British citizens would lose their right to move freely, work and do business within the largest economic area, the largest market in the world."

UKIP leader Nigel Farage said legal EU migrants should have the right to remain in the UK back in 2014.

And Lord Lawson, a former finance minister and prominent leave campaigner, said he would be able to continue living in France with just "some extra paperwork".

Some have cited the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties, which is said to protect citizens' acquired rights even if the treaty that conferred them is annulled.

When Greenland left an earlier version of the EU in 1985, the few foreign workers who were based there were protected by this agreement.

However lawyers have highlighted that the convention refers to states' rights, rather than individuals' rights.

According to the Economist, it is not actually mentioned in the Lisbon treaty, which sets out how countries leave the European Union.

While France hasn't even signed the convention, meaning it affords no protection to Brits living in France or the French living in the UK.

And a House of Commons report dismissed the precedent set by Greenland as "scarcely relevant".

