Forget the polls...psychic Otto the Octopus uses powers to predict Brexit vote outcome

2016-06-22

  CAVENDISH PRESS 

The limelight-loving sea creature was presented with two large Lego boxes, one emblazoned with Remain and one with Leave.

And with one of his telling tentacles he made his choice just hours before the polls shut tomorrow evening.

Both sides of the Brexit debate are currently neck-and-neck.

Staff at the Sea Life centre in Manchester there was "no wavering" as she wrapped her tentacles around the Remain box, even attempting to get inside it.

 CAVENDISH PRESS

 “She has continued to enjoy using her interactive skills for the various predictions”

Dan McLaughlan, from the Sea Life centre, said: "Otto has thrived and developed into a fun loving and charismatic creature.

"She has continued to enjoy using her interactive skills for the various predictions so now we’ll just have to see if her next vote is correct.”

Otto the Octopus follows on from the psychically minded mollusc Paul, who was hatched in Weymouth in 2008.

During the 2010 World Cup in South Africa Paul received worldwide acclaim for his punditry as he correctly predicted the outcome of eight consecutive matches, including the final.

 REUTERS

Paul passed away in 2010.

Meanwhile, in Andover, Hampshire, a patriotic mum could not believe her eyes when she saw a cloud shaped like the British Isles "standing alone and strong".

Nicola Holland, 43, said it could be seen as a "good omen".

 MERCURY

Another animal oracle on the scene is Claude The Clairvoyant Cock.

After being discovered by the Daily Star Sunday, he’s made predictions for the group clashes for all home nations.

Elsewhere, Yorkshire-based Little Valley Brewery has predicted the outcome of this week's referendum, with its beer based exit poll.

 W8 MEDIA

 LITTLE VALLEY BREWERY

The brewery created three beers ahead of the referendum: In, Out and IDK (I Don't Know), to encourage voters to engage in the debate and have their say.

With voting taking place tomorrow, the brewery has announced that IN has been the best seller of the three.

The Aire Bar in Leeds reporting a 68% IN to 32% OUT split earlier this month, as well as Manchester based Nip and Tipple, which gave drinkers a choice of all three beers, also reporting that they had sold out of IN.

Bookmaker Paddy Power is currently offering odds of 1/4 for Remain and 3/1 Leave.

It also reported that a horse called Brexit is due to run at Newbury racecourse as voters go to the poll, forcing bookies to offer odds of 20/1 for Brexit to win the race.

