EU vote: Campaign bullies have squeezed our ballots but now it's down to YOU

2016-06-23

  GETTY

+++ Polling stations across the country opened at 7am +++

Ukip leader Nigel Farage and Jeremy Corbyn have also voted. 

In one of the dirtiest campaigns in British political history, David Cameron, Jeremy Corbyn, Boris Johnson, Nigel Farage and Michael Gove gave their closing speeches before record numbers of voters head to polling stations today.

Voters have said respect for political figures is at an all time low after weeks of bullying and nastiness.

But there was no let-up yesterday as both sides seized on comments from Mr Juncker who insisted “out is out”.

He said: “We have concluded a deal with the Prime Minister.

 GETTY

 PA

 PA

 GETTY 

 GETTY

 “Jean-Claude Juncker directly contradicts the PM”

“He got the maximum he could receive, and we gave the maximum we could give, so there will be no kind of renegotiation.”

Leave campaigner Nigel Farage said the EU boss’s statement seemed to undermine Mr Cameron’s promise to fight for further changes.

The PM had said he would seek new free movement rules and added the process of EU reform will “continue" today.

Mr Farage insisted Cameron’s claims were now a pipe dream as he tweeted: “Jean-Claude Juncker directly contradicts the PM. There is no further renegotiation.”

But last night the Ukip leader pulled out of a Channel 4 Brexit debate at the last minute.

Vote Leave campaign leader Boris also seized on Mr Juncker’s quotes to say: “This gives the game away. If we stay in there is no prospect of any further change.

“This is it, folks. We have been told from the horse’s mouth that any hope of further change is absolute illusion.”

Mr Cameron insisted he expects to remain PM even if voters choose Brexit, telling the BBC Radio 4 Today programme: “I will accept the instructions of the British people and get to work on Friday morning to deliver them.”

Boris agreed he should “stay under any circumstances”.

Former PM Sir John Major branded the Brexit camp “the grave-diggers of our prosperity” who would have to answer for their “lies” during the referendum campaign.

 GETTY

 GETTY

On the key battleground of immigration, Mr Cameron insisted that reducing net migration was “not an unrealistic ambition”.

Labour leader Mr Corbyn said: “Don’t blame the migrant worker for being exploited, blame the company that’s exploiting them.”

He said the EU was not perfect but was the best “cross-border framework for defending living standards, rights and protections for our people”.

Speaking at a London rally, he added: “We believe to remain will be able to help us reform the European Union and would be right for people in this country.”

Meanwhile prominent Leave campaigner Michael Gove said sorry after comparing economists who have warned of the dangers of Brexit to scientists in the pay of the Nazis who smeared Albert Einstein.

