EU referendum: Horny Brits shun vote for Brexit BONKATHON

2016-06-22

GETTY

Instead of putting an X in the box on the EU ballot paper, they’ve voted for XXX-rated romps with complete strangers.

And one cheeky duo – holding a swingers’ party for ten couples on the day of the historic vote – have even ordered a batch of Boris Johnson, David Cameron and Jeremy Corbyn masks so guests can bed their favourite politician.

Eric The Red posted an ad on a sex site advertising the champagne-fuelled free-for-all – called the Brexit Bonkathon – with a break for nibbles at a luxury home near Manchester.

SG

“Hi guys, lets stick two fingers up to the Brexit vote and have some fun”

He said: "Hi guys, lets stick two fingers up to the Brexit vote and have some fun.

"I’m looking for ten couples to join us in our luxury home near Manchester. There’ll be champagne, wine, beer and nibbles.

"My good lady wife is even ordering some political masks so you can bonk Boris, cuddle Cameron and kiss Corbyn! Let’s make it a night to remember because whatever happens we’ll still all be Europeans in the morning.

"Please reply with pics so I can get the guest list going. Vote Sexit!”

Another swinger on a different site was also arranging a sex party for Thursday.

He wrote: “Anyone want to join my wife and I on Thursday night for some good old fashioned fun. who cares about the bloody Brexit vote? a bit of wife swapping gets my vote. Looking for three couples max.”

SG

And on a site set up so the clients of prostitutes can swap notes and rate their favourite sex workers, a fierce debate raged about whether a vote to leave the EU would mean an increase in the price of vice.

One worried punter wrote: "The price of pussy will go up! For a couple of reasons:

"A plunge in the £ will make it less attractive for foreign hookers to come here.

"E.g. if £ falls 15% the escort has to raise her prices by 15% to send the same amount of money home that she would have had before brexit.

"The price of ALL imports will rise. Harder for foreign escorts to enter the country, which will lower the supply and increase the price."

GETTY

But another self-declared expert on the financial impact exiting the EU would have on the cost of sex said that view was “rubbish”.

And he added: "Most escorts are from countries not in euro or dollar.

"Even if Britain leaves the EU and IF sterling goes down a fairly sizeable amount against euro or dollar, doubt it will change much against the Romanian Leu or even the Zloty.

"Most escorts will still earn vastly more than the pittance they get back home and so there "will be enough escorts charging a similar rate, even if some try it on.

"As for the bit about them finding it hard to get into the country, I'm not sure if you've read the comments on this thread. How do you think Brazilians, Russians, Thais etc get in."

