Daily Star readers back Brexit as Boris Johnson says Leave 'on verge of winning'

2016-06-22

 DS

Our exclusive poll of more than 4,400 people over the last week will boost Vote Leave as Brits go to the ballot boxes tomorrow.

Just 22% of our readers will heed the warnings of David Cameron, Jeremy Corbyn and big business by voting Remain.

By contrast, Boris Johnson and Nigel Farage's campaign to quit Europe has captured our readers' imagination, with 73% saying they are backing Brexit.

When the 5% who answered Don't Know are excluded, Leave wins by a 77-23 margin.

The news comes as Bojo declared Vote Leave to be on the verge of causing a political earthquake.

  AFP/GETTY/DAILY STAR

He told activists on a whirlwind tour of the UK that June 23 could be the country's "independence day".

The Tory big beast has urged voters to "believe" in Britain and ignore warnings of "Project Fear".

"I think we are on the verge of victory," added the former mayor of London.

Meanwhile Mr Cameron teamed up with ex-Tory PM Sir John Major and former Labour deputy leader Harriet Harman at a final rally for the Remain campaign.

Sir John branded Vote Leave as "grave-diggers of prosperity", urging possible Brexit supporters not to make their decision based on "half-truths".

 “I think we are on the verge of victory”

The prime minister accused the Leave campaign of "losing it" over comments from Michael Gove that likened economists warning of Brexit dangers to the Nazis smearing Albert Einstein.

Jeremy Corbyn – who has refused to share a platform with Mr Cameron during the campaign – addressed a Labour Remain event in London.

Mr Corbyn said: "We believe to remain will be able to help is reform the European Union and would be right for people in this country.

"We can make this country and the world a better place if we work with each other."

Intense rain showers forecast could have an impact on turnout – expected to be crucial to the result – with amber weather warnings in place.

