EU REFERENDUM: Calls for London to be granted INDEPENDENCE from UK after Brexit win

2016-06-24

  GETTY

London was an area with the massive support for the In campaign and following this morning's result, other big decisions are about to be made.

The London Independence Party has been created out of the dissatisfaction London residents feel at the results of the referendum – and some very pertinent questions are being asked.

The main issue which the party has decided to thrash out on Twitter includes where the official boundaries of London end (dubbed the "Watford Question") and what currency should now be used in the capital – with real oysters as a popular choice.

The Twitter account has even coined their own hashtag, #Londout.

We'll be needing an anthem

Forget #Brexit. It's all about #Londout now. pic.twitter.com/K8OGrR7IeV

Let's touch out of Britian #LIP #LondonIndependence pic.twitter.com/lG6bpC5Fcs

 “”

Following Lindsay Lohan's Brexit live tweeting last night, the account has approached her to be their leader.

Scotland also predominantly voted Remain and SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon confirmed this morning a second Scottish Referendum will be approached.

And so London isn't a complete lone entity, the account has reached out to ask whether Scots would prefer the Northern or Metropolitan underground line extended all the way up north.

Other proposed ideas include a Crossrail 3 to link the city up with the "cool clubs in Amsterdam", refrigerated handrails on the tube and to extend the Bakerloo line to Paris.

 

What currency shall we use? #LDN #LondonIndependence

BREAKING: London/Scotland alliance reveal proposed extension to the Northern line. pic.twitter.com/pz6UF6jU7f

The worst political decision since Springfield built a monorail #notmyvote

"I was bored at 1am and the initial signs looked like it would be London vs the rest of the country," the anonymous founder of the movement told the i100.

"London is going to be angry. Scotland can (and probably will) do something about it and split. Londoners will feel powerless about something they didn't vote for."

The hashtag #notmyvote is also currently trending on Twitter, with dozens writing about their discontent about the decision.

Twitter user Becky wrote: "I turn 18 in 9 months, but apparently 90 year olds were more qualified to decide my future."

Adam Curran added: "The worst political decision since Springfield built a monorail."

Currently, five other EU nations could be set to hold a referendum on seperating themselves from Brussels.

