Buying Euros? Brits holidaying on the Med this summer have just taken a HUGE hit

2016-06-24

  GETTY

The Pound dropped 7% this morning to around €1.2085 as soon as markets reacted to the Leave campaign's victory.

Sterling crashed by 10% to its lowest level for 30 years and experts have warned it could fall to 20%.

Customers exchanging £1,000 the day before the vote would get €1,306, but today they would only receive €1,231 - a difference of £60.61.

 GETTY

Over the last week there were reports of concerned Brits queuing up outside exchange bureaus up and down the country desperate to withdraw Euros.

But now their Pounds will buy them even less Euros as Sterling's value plummets.

For Brits heading to the Med this summer for their holidays, it is the worst possible news.

 “Everybody is buying their foreign currency now, they don't want to wait until tomorrow”

Many have already reported difficulty in withdrawing money abroad.

It means that for many families and couples, they potentially face having hundreds of Euros less to spend.

Mike Cooke, chief executive of Currency Exchange Corporation, said it planned to increase stocks of dollar and euro notes by 80% overnight in response to high demand.

Speaking earlier in the week he said: "Everybody is buying their foreign currency now, they don't want to wait until tomorrow."

He added: "At one stage today we were virtually sold out of euros and dollars at every branch."

The company also reported replenishing stock in anticipation for strong sales on Thursday.

Ian Strafford-Taylor, chief executive of currency provider FairFX, said: "Those consumers who did not stock up on their holiday money may find their holiday now becomes more expensive this year, if weak pound-euro rates continue into the summer."

David Cameron had previously claimed that a holiday for four people for eight nights will cost an extra £230 extra.

While these claims were difficult to prove, it is certain that airlines insisted that the cost of flights would increase.

Both Easyjet and Ryanair said that they would increase prices as a result of more restrictive aviation rules.

 GETTY

But IAG, owner of British Airways, said a UK exit would not affect its business.

Holidaymakers can protect themselves from a further fall in the Pound's value by reserving currency for a fee of £3-4.

This will allow customers to lock in travel money 45 days in advance at today's rates.

 GETTY

 PA

Company's which allow this are American Express, Travelex and Moneycorp.

On the other hand the Pound could recover as the dust settles over the vote.

Research conducted by economic analysis on travel insurance costs concluded: "In the longer term, following a Brexit, travel is likely to become more expensive."

But what is certain is that British holidaymakers will now need to queue up and get a visa before travelling to Europe.

