'Anti-fascist' protestors march on London Bridge after Brexit vote

2016-06-24

The group was seen being escorted by a heavy police presence as it made its way across London Bridge.

The 1,000–strong crowd were seen carrying flags, banners and letting off flares.

Protestors wearing balaclavas – mainly from anti-fascist groups – blasted music from a boombox as they chanted their discontent.

DAILY STAR

DAILY STAR

“People have been fed this lie that migrants are to blame – and they've bought it”

The peaceful protest made its way along London Bridge, before stopping in the square outside London Bridge station.

An MC rallied the group which screamed "Tories out, migrants in" as well as criticising media coverage of Brexit.

One King's College student – who asked not to be named – told Daily Star Online that the referendum result represented a rejection of modern politics.

She said: "I think the referendum showed that people are sick of the polticial elite.

"I'm not sure that people from areas that voted Brexit did so because it was what they wanted. It was more that it represented a change to the status quo.

"People have been fed this lie that migrants are to blame – and they've bought it, when they should be looking at the politicians."

DAILY STAR

DAILY STAR

Stock markets have tumbled as a consequence of Britan's decision to leave the EU.

The pound was at one point 10% down agains the dollar.

Britain's decision to break away has prompted fears from Germany's Angela Merkel that other countries will quit the EU.

France, Austria, Hungary and the Netherlands are all thought to be seriously considering the idea of leaving.

A day of political upheaval has followed the historic vote.

Prime Minister David Cameron has resigned from his position.

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn is under immense pressure from his own party after a vote of no confidence.

And SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon has demanded a second referendum on Scottish independence.

Further calls for the break up of the Union have followed from Northern Ireland, where Sinn Fein called for a "border poll".

