Britain’s immigration crisis: How leaving the EU could change this

2016-06-23

PA

Britain’s struggle to curb immigration has been one of the most high-profile and controversial issues of the hard-fought campaign in recent weeks.

One of the most memorable images has been Ukip’s leader Nigel Farage standing in front of his “breaking point” poster showing a vast queue of refugees.

The Remain camp has roundly condemned the anti-migrant poster and even leading Eurosceptic Tory Michael Gove admitted he “shuddered” when he saw it.

Chancellor George Osborne argued that there is a difference between “whipping up division”, as done by the poster, and the need to address real immigration concerns.

As accusations continue to fly in the final hours of the campaign, here is a look at how Brexit could help the UK deal with the immigration crisis.

PA

Britain would regain more control over immigration because Brexit would bring to an end the free movement of EU migrants in and out of Britain.

The right of EU citizens to live and work in any member states is guaranteed by the EU’s founding principle of the “free movement of people”.

Even Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn has admitted that there cannot be an upper limit on immigration “while you have the free movement of labour”.

David Cameron’s EU deal would mean that new EU immigrants could not access full in-work benefits until they have been here for four years.

PA

As the referendum campaign progressed, Brexit campaigners have increasingly focused on public concerns about immigration in order to win over voter.

Vote Leave chair and Labour MP Gisela Stuart stressed that uncontrolled immigration was putting pressure on housing and public services such the NHS.

Ms Stuart said: “The only way to get a fairer immigration policy and to bring in an Australian-style points-based system is to vote leave.”

At the start of this month, leading Vote Leave politicians said migrants should be admitted based on their skills “without discrimination on the ground of nationality”.

Immigration is a legitimate concern, but it’s not a good reason to leave the EU @yorkshirepost #Remain #StrongerInhttps://t.co/FSsu8ggZTn

Remain campaigners have acknowledged concerns over immigration, but they argue that pulling Britain out of the EU is the wrong way to deal with them.

Mr Cameron said that Britain should reduce immigration within the EU, adding: "It would be madness to try to do that by trashing our economy and pulling out of the single market.”

The murder of pro-EU MP Jo Cox has changed the tone of the immigration debate. Mrs Cox stressed the benefits of immigration such as the number of EU health professionals here.

She recently wrote in the Yorkshire Post: “I strongly believe that concerns about immigration – as legitimate as they are – are not a reason to vote for Brexit.”

Last month it was revealed that net migration to the UK rose to a whopping 333,000 in 2015 - the second highest figure on record.

Mr Cameron has pledged to cut migration to under 100,000. But home affairs committee chairman MP Keith Vaz said it would “take a modern miracle” to do so.

His former aide Steve Hilton, who backs Brexit, said: “When I was working in government, we were told, by officials, that as long as we were in the EU we couldn't control the level of immigration.”

The plague-like disease which eats the flesh of dogs alive has spread from southern England to the Midlands, Wales, Lancashire, Scotland and Ireland.

