Her Maj issues EU challenge: 'Give me three GOOD reasons to stay'

2016-06-22

  GETTY

The claim, made by Queen’s biographer Robert Lacey, was made in a blog for the Daily Beast website.

It comes as polls show the crucial EU referendum vote on Thursday is too close to call.

Mr Lacey said: "And while Buckingham Palace has rightly deplored the impropriety of disclosing Her Majesty’s private remarks, the Palace has been careful not to define her views.

 GETTY

 “Give me THREE good reasons”

"Nor to deny that her sympathies might, on occasions, like those of many of her subjects, have veered towards Brexit.

"Give me THREE good reasons,' she has, apparently, been asking her dinner companions recently, 'why Britain should be part of Europe?'"

Buckingham Palace has not confirmed or denied this.

Last month The Sun featured a front page headline saying the "Queen backs Brexit".

But the press regulator IPSO found the headline "significantly misled" readers.

One royal insider said: "She appears to be asking a question, not making a statement.

"She is not expressing a view."

A spokesman for Buckingham Palace said: "The Queen is above politics and acts on the advice of Her Government in political matters.

"The referendum is a matter for the British people to decide."

Before the Scottish independence referendum, the Queen asked voters "to think very carefully about the future".

Asked about the article, the author said: "The Queen likes a healthy debate around the dinner table. It was just a question.

"She's aware of the complexities for different parts of the UK.

"As we know, she's very careful not to betray whatever her personal opinions may be on this. You can say the same of her husband.”

The alleged comments come as a host of celebs voice their opinions, showing they are as divided about Brexit as the rest of us. 

It is set to go the wire – don’t expect the bookies to payout much.

Decision day is Thursday and you will be able to cast your EU referendum vote at your local polling station between 7am and 10pm.

There will be one question: "Should the United Kingdom remain a member of the European Union or leave the European Union?"

