Boris Johnson for PM: Is THIS the man that could be running our country?

2016-06-24

The UK is soon to be run by a Prime Minister it didn’t vote into office, once David Cameron officially leaves in October.

Boris Johnson – firm campaigner for the Leave camp – is already tipped to throw his hat in the ring to take up Cameron’s place at number 10.

To truly scrutinise the MP before he undoubtedly bids for the top job we have decided to take a look at some of his biggest gaffes.

EXPRESS

Let’s face it – barely a day went by during his reign as London Mayor where the bumbling blonde didn’t do something a bit silly.

For example – that time he rugby tackled a child and sent him flying.

Or what about the moment he fell into a river while attempting to clear it?

Surely we need someone who can stand on their own two feet to represent us on the world stage?

There was even that time he failed to correctly answer any questions taken from an IQ test when he appeared for an interview on LBC radio.

As Mayor, he caused controversy by suggesting some people struggle to get on in life because of their low IQs.

But he himself failed the test live on air in this embarrassing footage.

Back in 2006, the Tory MP was taking part in a charity football match – a light-hearted attempt to recreate the England v Germany match of 1966 – in front of 15,000 people at the Madejski stadium in Reading.

But he took the match a little too seriously and – has become something of a running theme Boris and team sports – he launched himself at German No 6, Maurizio Gaudino, headbutting him in the crotch and sending him flying.

The sight of the mop-haired MP powering into his stunned opponent's groin brought a roar from the crowd.

Ingrained in the memories of people across the UK though of course is the moment the politician got stuck on a zipline while promoting London 2012.

Despite his eccentricity, Boris remains one of the most popular – yet divisive – politicians in Britain.

Whether he will be the man to lead the country in the wave of Brexit remains to be seen – but it is highly likely he will be in the running to be Cameron's successor.

