Most awkward moment during Brexit? Gibraltar's five minutes of fame rudely interrupted

2016-06-24

We’ve all been there when a phone goes off at exactly the wrong time – at the theatre or cinema, during a minute’s silence – or in this case during the announcement of a momentous referendum vote.

The eyes of the world were on Gibraltar returning officer Paul Martinez after the British territory was the first to count its votes in the historic referendum which has seen Britain vote to leave the UK.

Gibraltar counted up its 20,145 votes before any UK constituency as voters went to the polls an hour ahead.

As the whole of Britain and Europe waited on Mr Martinez’s words – delivering the first official result of the referendum – he opened his mouth only to be stopped in his tracks by a ringing mobile phone from the audience at his press conference.

GETTY/SKY

The poor guy is less than impressed that his moment in the spotlight has been stolen and so follows an uncomfortable silence as Martinez tuts and shakes his head.

The results were eventually announced and rang out a resounding win for Remain, with 19,322 (95.91%) of people voting In and just 823 (4.09%) for Out.

But of course, it wasn’t enough to swing the vote as the Leave camp celebrates against all odds success with a 51.9% majority voting to quit the EU.

UKIP leader Nigel Farage has since been heralding the victory saying "decent, ordinary people have won".

He added: "We have given ourselves a chance to rejoin the world in the 21st century."

Following the result, Prime Minister David Cameron announced his resignation from Downing Street after the humiliating defeat.

The PM had campaigned for Britain to Remain in the EU.

SKY

Cameron said he would leave it to his successor to invoke Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty, which kicks off the two-year process of negotiating a new trade relationship with the UK's former partners.

"The country requires fresh leadership to take it in this direction," said Mr Cameron.

"I will do everything I can as Prime Minister to steady the ship over the coming weeks and months, but I don't think it would be right for me to try to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination."

Meanwhile, the Bank of England said it is prepared to provide £250bn to prop up the British pound after its value plunged to record lows following Britain's vote to leave the European Union.

