Premier League boss: ‘UK will not be respected if we leave the EU’

2016-06-20

GETTY\MARK LEECH

Executive chairman Richard Scudamore said opposition to the EU would be "incongruous" in the context of the league's commitment to "openness".

Speaking to BBC Radio 5 live, Mr Scudamore, who was not speaking on behalf of the league's 20 member clubs, criticised Brexit supporters' belief that leaving the EU would reclaim British sovereignty.

He said: ”Nobody bears the scars more than me of having to go and negotiate in Brussels and try and organise things a little bit in our interests in terms of the European machine.

"Ultimately you can't break away, you can't just pull out, you have to get in and negotiate and try and organise and try and influence."

GETTY\TOM DULAT

“We would just be, I think, respected less around the world for not wanting to be part of something”

As well as opposing the ethos of the Premier League, the football chief said Britain risked losing its international respect if it were to leave the EU.

He said: "We would just be, I think, respected less around the world for not wanting to be part of something."

He added: "That doesn't seem to sit very well when you travel the world like we do being welcomed because of the fact that we are open for business, open for discussion, and open for cooperation.

GETTY

"There is an openness about the Premier League which I think it would be completely incongruous if we were to take the opposite position."

The Premier League generated £3.3bn of revenue last season, according to a review by Deloitte, and boasts worldwide television contracts worth £8.3bn.

The Leave camp have criticised Mr Scudamore's remarks.

They argue Brexit could free up more funds to be invested in sports.

Vote Leave's Robert Oxley said: "EU rules hurt both our ability to develop home grown talent and restrict access to the global talent pool.

"That's the worst of both worlds for football fans and the teams they support. If we take back control, we can spend the £350m we send to Brussels each week on our priorities, like grassroots sport."

