EU referendum countdown: The ultimate guide to voting this Thursday

2016-06-21

GETTY

And there are just days left until you have to cast your ballot in the referendum on June 23rd with Prime Minister David Cameron urging voters to remain while the likes of Boris Johnson are backing the Brexit campaign.

But if you’re still debating where to put your own cross this guide to the issues will help.

Here we put the arguments for both sides on all the big topics from immigration to the economy…

GETTY

REMAIN: EU membership is worth £91billion a year to the economy.

The economic shock of leaving could tip us into recession according to the Bank of England. Many jobs could be lost and households would be, on average, £4,300 a year poorer.

Around 50 per cent of our exports currently go to the EU. At the moment UK companies can export to the EU without tariffs.

LEAVE: The UK would be able to manage our own economy better, negotiating its own trade agreements with other countries. There would be less burden of regulation on British companies.

We are such an important market for EU countries that they would still want to trade with us.

More flexibility and reform of labour laws could actually make Britain better off.

REMAIN: Only a minority of our laws come from Brussels and Britain retains control of things like setting income tax and foreign affairs.

Despite being in the EU we have been able to opt out of some of its policies such as staying out of the Euro.

LEAVE: Too many British laws have arisen from EU directives.

We only have small percentage of the votes in the EU’s Council of Ministers and in the European Parliament meaning that other EU states can force through decisions against the wishes of the UK.

FIND OUT WHAT THE CELEBS ARE SAYING ABOUT THE REFERENDUM

GETTY

REMAIN: Our economy needs immigrants to function properly and those from the EU pay more in taxes than they take out in benefits, contributing £20billion in the decade to 2011.

Cameron’s new EU deal will restrict in-work benefits for migrant workers for four years.

LEAVE: Net migration is running at over 300,000 a year, putting a strain on public services like the NHS.

At the moment people in the EU have the right to come and work here. If Turkey joins the EU millions more may come.

Leaving the EU will allow us to control our borders better.

GETTY

REMAIN: It’s harder for terrorists to come here than move around the EU as we are not in the so called Schengen area. E

uropol, the European Union’s law enforcement agency, helps us exchange intelligence on terrorists with our European partners.

Formed in the aftermath of two world wars the EU helps maintain peace in Europe.

LEAVE: Europe’s open border policy means terrorists can move around more easily, posing a threat to Britain.

We will still be able to co-operate with other European countries to tackle terrorism outside the EU.

Currently the supremacy of EU courts makes it harder for us to deport violent criminals.

Brexit won’t lead to war – Britain’s security comes from membership of NATO not the EU.

REMAIN: While the UK is a net contributor to the EU the economic benefits outweigh the costs. We also get over £4billion a year back from the EU in things like payments to farmers and poorer regions.

If we wanted access to the single market after Brexit we’d still have to contribute to the EU budget.

LEAVE: The gross cost of being in the EU is £350million a week and if we left we could use the money saved on our own priorities like more funding for the NHS.

If the UK left we would be able to spend the cash that we currently get back from the EU as we saw fit.

GETTY

REMAIN: It’s thanks to the EU that we have a 48-hour a well limit on time at work. And rights like paid maternity leave and paid holidays are protected by EU law.

Three million jobs are linked to our trade with the EU.

LEAVE: UK law already protects things like maternity and holiday pay and would be unlikely to change.

EU regulations tie up small business in red tape. Less bureaucracy could create more jobs while lower migration levels would lead to wage increases.

