Conspiracy theorists claim footage shows Brexit vote counter rubbing out cross on ballot

2016-06-24

The clip was spotted during a Sky News broadcast before it was announced that Britain would leave the EU.

There is of course no way to prove the counter was rubbing out a vote and the clip could just as easily show her rubbing out a spoil on the paper.

But with the anger surrounding “pencilgate”, theorists will use the clip as further fuel to their fire.

Voters had already complained about the use of pencils in polling stations, claiming it made it easier to rig votes.

One woman was given a stern talking to after she lent her pen to voters.

  LIVELEAK

 LIVELEAK

 “The use of pencils does not in itself increase the likelihood of electoral fraud”

The footage, posted to video sharing site LiveLeak, had mixed responses from viewers.

One said: “No... election fraud.. say it isn't so. Pencils….”

But another added: “We don't know what she did, it may have been the Times Cross word puzzle for all the OP knows!”

Jordan Lawrence, representing the Electoral Commission, said there was no link to the use of pencils and spoiled votes.

 PA

He added: “The use of pencils does not in itself increase the likelihood of electoral fraud: while pencil marks can be rubbed out, similarly, pen marks can be crossed out.

"What is key is that the integrity of the process from the point that a voter marks their ballot paper to the declaration of the result is maintained.”

Rigging votes in the UK is illegal and is classed as electoral fraud.

Following the shock result that saw a narrow victory for the Leave campaign, David Cameron resigned as Prime Minister.

He said: “The country requires free leadership to take it in this direction.

"I will do everything I can as Prime Minister to steady the ship over the coming weeks and months, but I don't think it would be right for me to try to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination."

And the result could have a seismic impact on the life of many Britons.

Already, the value of the pound has dropped to its lowest value since 1985.

Both Scotland and Northern Ireland are also threatening independence from the UK.

But Leave campaigners have hailed the result, with UKIP leader Nigel Farage claiming it was “a victory for real people”.

