Incredible lightning display caught on camera as storms batter Britain

2016-06-23

The Met Office issued red “immediate action” flood warnings for parts of south-east London and Essex as huge thunderstorms battered the capital and the rest of southern England.

Apocalyptic scenes were filmed by worried Brits, as thunder boomed and lightning streaked across the sky last night (June 22).

Reports of flooded streets, lightning striking houses, sodden homes and businesses and rising waters engulfing cars have inundated the London Fire Brigade.

An LFB spokesperson said: “Between around 1.30am and 3am our control officers took over 300 calls – around as many as they would receive in an average day.”

  BARCROFT MEDIA 

 SKY BEWS

The torrential rain has caused flash flooding and travel disruption across the country, especially in London.

Embankment tube station and Lambeth North station, both in central London, were closed this morning due to flooding.

Tooting Broadway in south London and Borough and Canning Town in east London were also shut due to the rain. 

The District line, the Docklands Light Railway and the London overground network were suspended or delayed, leading to widespread commuter chaos.

It’s not just London's rail networks that are suffering – many of the capital’s roads were plagued by localised flooding, including the North Circular, which was closed at Waltham Forest.

Meanwhile, horrified drivers woke up to find their cars floating in floodwater in Barking, Essex.

As the polls opened for people to cast their vote in the EU referendum today (June 23), several polling stations were completely flooded in Surrey. 

There are fears that the rain and flooding could prevent people heading to the polls to vote in the EU referendum.

Polling stations are open until 10pm tonight – but the rain is expected to continue well into the night.

 SWNS

 Paul Wood

 WEATHER

The Met Office warned that although the rain would ease off this morning, it would return with full force at around 2pm this afternoon.

They also issued a yellow 'be aware” warning for the whole of the south-east until 6am on Friday.

Forecaster Luke Miall said: “A band of showers is coming across the English Channel and moving north-eastwards that will bring some heavy downpours and localised surface flooding.

"There’s going to be a bit of hail in there too, so there’s quite a lot going on.” 

He added: “If you’re in the south-east, you definitely need your umbrella and possibly a pair of wellington boots.”

 SWNS

 SWNS

The rain has already turned Glastonbury Festival at Worthy Farm, Somerset, into a muddy quagmire. 

Travel chaos resulted in huge pile-ups along the motorways yesterday (June 22) as music-lovers struggled to reach the site due to the terrible weather. 

With 180,000 people expected to arrive over the next few days, it's unlikely the campsite will dry out at all. 

The worst weather is predicted to hit on Saturday night, when singer Adele is headlining. 

