Michael Gove compares anti-Brexit experts to Nazis in latest EU gaffe

2016-06-22

“They got 100 German scientists in the pay of the government to say that he was wrong”

The leading member of the Leave campaign made the comparison as Britain goes to the polls tomorrow to decide the nation’s in the EU Referendum.

The majority of economists and financial institutions have warned Britain quitting the EU could have significant consequences for our economy.

But speaking in a radio interview, Mr Gove compared these experts to Nazis and boasted a Brexit would lead to a more prosperous United Kingdom.

GETTY

Speaking to Iain Dale on LBC, he said: “I think the key thing here is to interrogate the assumptions that are made and to ask if these arguments are good.

"We have to be careful about historical comparisons, but Albert Einstein during the 1930s was denounced by the German authorities for being wrong and his theories were denounced, and one of the reasons of course he was denounced was because he was Jewish.

"They got 100 German scientists in the pay of the government to say that he was wrong and Einstein said: 'Look, if I was wrong, one would have been enough'.

"The truth is that if you look at the quality of the analysis, if you look at the facts on the ground, you can come to an appropriate conclusion.”

The International Monetary Fund, ten Nobel-prize winning economists and the Bank of England have all warned leaving the EU could damage the British economy.

GETTY

Gove's Nazi gaffe following Boris Johnson compared Brussels' aims to those of Nazi despot Adolf Hitler.

But the economy is not the only talking point, with the immigration crisis being one of the biggest debates in the key vote.

UKIP leader Nigel Farage has boasted a Brexit could spell doom for the EU but said the shooting of Labour MP Jo Cox had sapped the momentum of the out campaign.



The Brexit battle is heating up and the nation is divided – with people using anything to gain an advantage.As Brits prepare to go the polls tomorrow and celebs weighed in exclusively for Daily Star Online.

The Queen even issued a challenge at dinner asking guests to give three reasons why Britain should remain in Europe.

But some Brits and getting into the swing of things a different way, with some preferring to have a Brexit bonkathon, while two girls were pictured naked in support of Bremain.

Daily Star Online has answered the important questions about what happens if we leave, what happens if we stay, and how Brexit will affect you – as well as producing an essential EU referendum fact sheet and a breakdown of the important terms.

