EU referendum 2016: How Brexit will change your day-to-day life

2016-06-24

PA

Brexit is now certain after a majority of Brits voted to quit the EU.

The nation will change forever but what impact would Brexit have on you, your family and friends?

Brexit could be bad news for your weekly shop because the value of the pound is expected to drop.

A weaker pound means more expensive imports, in turn pushing up the cost of food and booze such as French cheese and Italian wine.

Brexiteers claim that being in the EU actually increases supermarket prices due to its “protectionist policies”.

PA

But future tariffs on food and drink exports would be up in the air because we don’t know what a post-Brexit trade deal would actually look like.

If Britain fails to thrash out a free trade agreement, it would fall back on its World Trade Organization membership, which involves high EU tariffs for food.

Holidaymakers would have to splash more cash on European holidays if Brexit leads to a fall in the value of the pound.

Britons might also lose the right to compensation if flights are delayed and cancelled – something that is currently guaranteed under an EU regulation.

They could be forced to give up access to free healthcare in Europe as well as financial protection for package holidays there.

Getty

If Britain quits the EU, then it is thought that international footballers would be forced to get work visas in order to keep playing here.

Under current visa rules, players like Dimitri Payet and N'Golo Kante would be barred from coming over as their international records wouldn’t meet FA criteria.

The Remain camp has warned that Brexit would jeopardise the influx of European talent. But Brexiteers argue it could be good for home-grown rising stars.

Leave supporters have pointed out that Premier League players already come to play in Britain from all over the world.

Getty

It is extremely unlikely that expats living in Spain and other European countries would be expelled in the event of Brexit.

But they could lose certain rights such as access to healthcare and benefits systems in their adopted homelands.

A Government paper on Brexit warns there is no guarantee that Britons would keep the rights to work, reside, own property and use public services abroad.

It says: “UK citizens resident abroad, among them those who have retired to Spain, would not be able to assume that these rights will be guaranteed.”

At the moment you can hop on the ferry across to Calais to stock up on as much cut-price booze as you like.

But leaving the EU could spell the end of cross-channel booze cruises to France, warns the Association of British Travel Agents (ABTA).

Victoria Bacon, of ABTA, says: “At the moment you can cross to continental Europe and buy as much booze as you want to bring home. In the event that we leave the EU, this will have to be renegotiated.

“The negotiation process will take at least two years and this continuing uncertainty is bound to affect the value of the pound.”

