UK faces snap General Election before end of year – and Labour MPs think Corbyn will LOSE

2016-06-24

LNP/REUTERS/PA

Dame Margaret Hodge feels Mr Corbyn would be unable to win any snap election called after David Cameron's successor is put in place.

The PM quit hours after the UK voted to leave the EU by a 52-48 margin.

Boris Johnson has emerged as the favourite to succeed his former Eton schoolmate.

Labour is worried Mr Corbyn would not be able to beat the Tories after Leave swept to big wins in the party's heartlands in the north of England and Wales.

London overwhelmingly backed Remain, but large swathes of the East and West Midlands, the north west, north east and Yorkshire voted for Leave.

Critics say the Labour leader did not do enough to get out the Labour vote, arguing that he joined the debate late and campaigned half-heartedly.

“No, I'm carrying on”

A senior Labour source says the mood in the party after the Brexit outcome is one of "utter devastation".

Mr Corbyn questioned the approach of Dame Margaret, who submitted a no confidence motion to the Parliamentary Labour Party (PLP), citing "massive political issues" which need to be dealt with.

Labour MPs are warning they need to act swiftly to prevent a catastrophe at the polls.

A host of rebels are prepared to back the motion, increasing the likelihood that they will get the 50 Labour MPs needed to trigger a formal challenge.

Dame Margaret's motion was submitted to PLP chairman John Cryer with a request that it should be discussed at the next meeting of the group on Monday, with a vote the following day.

Asked if he will resign, Mr Corbyn said: "No, I'm carrying on.

"I'm making the case for unity, I'm making the case of what Labour can offer to Britain, of decent housing for people, of good secure jobs for people, of trade with Europe and of course with other parts of the world. Because if we don't get the trade issue right we've got a real problem in this country."

Although the motion has no formal status, backers hope it will help build a sense that confidence in Mr Corbyn is draining away, forcing him to resign.

Dame Margaret told Sky News: "The European referendum was a test of leadership and I think Jeremy failed that test. He came out too slowly, he was very half-hearted about his attempts to campaign and Labour voters simply didn't get the message.

"I hope, in the context of a secret ballot, that there will be overwhelming support for this motion I am putting and Jeremy will do the decent thing and resign."

A spokesman for Mr Corbyn labelled Dame Margaret's move as "a bit of a self-indulgent act".

