Cops called over pen-gate as voters camp outside polling stations handing them out

2016-06-23

Conspiracy theories online claimed pencils votes would get rubbed out by agents acting for M15.

The Electoral Commission has said voters are allowed to vote with pens, saying pencils are provided out of tradition. 

But one woman was spoken to by a PCSO after lending her pen to other voters.

In the clip, she says she has no idea how any of those people voted, only that she herseif is "100% UKIP". 

 AFP/GETTY

 NCJ MEDIA

 “If a voter wishes to bring their own pen and use that, it's fine”

The PCSO still took details from Jacqueline Jackson amid a social media storm over Brexit backers taking their own pens.

Elsewhere, Lee Dyson, 36, sat outside Salters Lane Community Centre in Stockton-on-Tees, County Durham, from 7am to 10pm today to run a pen-loan service.

The warehouse operative said: "When I went in, it was just pencils and I thought 'why? There's no reason?'"

"I checked and found out you can use pens, so I decided to make sure other people knew that too by sitting outside today, handing them out.

"They didn't like it when I first turned up. They tried to move me on, but then I was allowed to stay.

"A lot of people have brought their own pens because of what's been on the internet, but a lot haven't and were happy to get one to take in.

"I was not swaying people to vote one way or another — that would be against the law and that's not why I'm here. I just want to ensure everything is fair — there's nothing else to it.

 

  TWITTER/GETTY

The hashtag #usepens is trending on Twitter with Leave supporters suspicious their vote could be rubbed out and changed if they do it with a pencil.

A YouGov poll found 46% of Leave voters think it's "probably true" that their vote will be altered.

The Electoral Commission has done its best to reassure voters that using a pencil will not affect their vote, but said people can use pens if they wish.

A spokesman said: “By tradition, pencils are available in polling booths for voters to mark their ballot papers.

“If a voter wishes to bring their own pen and use that, it's fine.

“In regards to security, at the count there are statutory observers to make sure that they are carried out correctly.

“Campaigners are also invited to observe the counts taking place.”

Clarification

We have been asked to clarify that on 23 June 2016 at 12.25 a PCSO attended a polling station in Durnford Close Chichester following a report of a woman becoming threatening after lending her pen to voters. The police attended the scene due to the report of threats being made by a woman rather than the woman lending her pen. Whilst a woman was spoken to no arrests were made. We are happy to set the record straight and accept that the PCSO who attended the scene only did so due to the report of threatening behaviour and not the lending of a pen.

