Europe in meltdown: The Far Right set to rise up after shock Brexit win

2016-06-24

  GETTY

Far right leaders across Europe have hailed the historic referendum votes, calling it a victory for their own anti-EU and anti-immigrant positions.

They have also pledged to push for similar votes in their own countries – something that could see the European Union collapse.

France’s Front National (FN) Marine Le Pen, which is considered a very conservative party, told RTL radio this morning: “Like a lot of French people, I’m very happy that the British people held on and made the right choice.

"What we thought was impossible yesterday has now become possible."

This morning, she also changed her Twitter profile picture to a Union Jack.

 TWITTER

VICTORY ! #EUref #Brexit

 GETTY

Le Pen's niece, Marion Maréchal Le Pen – one of the Front National’s two MPs – sent out a tweet calling the vote a "victory".

Before polling stations had closed, Marine Le Pen was already prediciting a Brexit – even holding a Brit-French referendum party.

Donald Trump, who recently became the U.S. Republican Party nominee for President called the result a "great thing", adding that the UK's residents have "taken back their country"

He made the remarks as touched down at his Trump Turnberry golf resort in Scotland this morning.

Ambiance franco-britannique pour célébrer la liberté des nations ! pic.twitter.com/A0rVVhno78

Meanwhile, Geert Wilders of the right wing Dutch Party for Freedom (PVV) released a statement congratulating Britain on "Independence Day".

It said: "Britain points Europe the way to the future and to liberation. It is time for a new start, relying on our own strength and sovereignty. Also in the Netherlands.

"The Dutch people deserve a referendum as well. The Party for Freedom consequently demands a referendum on NExit, a Dutch EU exit."

Wilders himself said: “We want be in charge of our own country, our own money, our own borders, and our own immigration policy.

"If I become prime minister, there will be a referendum in the Netherlands on leaving the European Union as well. Let the Dutch people decide.”

 GETTY

Hurrah for the British! Now it is our turn. Time for a Dutch referendum! #ByeByeEUhttps://t.co/kXZ0aQtgmx

Matteo Salvini, leader of Italy's Northern League Party, which is also considered far right, said of the result: “Hurrah for the courage of free citizens! Heart, head and pride beat lies, threats and blackmail. THANKS UK, now it’s our turn."

Meanwhile, David Cameron announced his resignation in a press conference outside 10 Downing Street at just before 8.30am.

