Why TV would secretly love more referendums

2016-06-24

  GETTY

Remarkably similar, in fact, to Gillette Soccer Saturday on Sky Sports, bringing us those scores as they happen – only without the fantastically excitable Jeff Stelling to front it, doing that thing where he starts a sentence in a normal voice, then begins to sound mildly constipated, then SUDDENLY STARTS YELLING, as if he's caught fire.

Honestly, at a time when the battle for television viewers is tougher than ever, I reckon the main terrestrial channels would kill for an excuse to put out more live broadcasts of such importance, albeit at a more viewer-friendly hour.

The kind where we're compelled to tune in, right here and right now, where it's all about the immediacy, about history possibly unfolding before our eyes, where catching up with it later on the iPlayer or the ITV Hub or what-have-you would just be pointless and rubbish.

We do get a similar buzz, I guess, with live entertainment shows, such as when Britain's Got Talent is stripped across a whole week.

That same sense that anything could happen at any moment (well, except during that Moldovan sword-swallower's act, which the killjoy BGT bosses made him pre-record, owing to some namby-pamby health and safety rule about not letting people impale themselves on live TV before the watershed).

We get it, too, with those occasional live soap episodes, where the comedy value of seeing someone fluffing their lines – or "Branning their lines," as I believe it's now known – can only be fully appreciated if you're watching at the very moment it happens.

And yes, we've had it at times with Euro 2016. England, Wales, Northern Ireland and the Republic have all served up moments of pure, unforgettable, delirium-triggering drama that you had to be watching live to really savour.

Live reality shows, live soaps, live sport – they can all make great event TV.

But none of them – probably not even a General Election – carries the weight of a national referendum results show, where we've been given the chance to determine our country's future.

 “We'd just need to find other vital issues to vote on”

Waiting to see how such a vitally important vote turns out, building a marathon TV event around it, takes compulsive viewing to a whole new level.

What TV bosses must secretly long for, then, is more of these huge, potentially history-shaping events. More referendums, referenda, whatever you want to call them, from which they can create more event TV, as we gather in front of tellies to hear the outcome.

We'd just need to find other vital issues to vote on. And, OK, I'm struggling to think of any at the moment.

Abolishing the controversial 5p charge on supermarket carrier bags? Hmm, doesn't quite set the pulse racing.

Also, I gather Dimblebeeb doesn't want to present any more of these through-the-night marathons, which is a bit of a blow.

But at least he has a ready-made replacement waiting in the wings. A TV presenter with his own unique style of delivery, perfect for such occasions. A man with equal gravitas and authority.

I just hope he brings Matt Le Tissier with him.

* Read Mike Ward's TV previews every day in your Daily Star. Follow him on Twitter @mikewardontv

