Brits struggle to withdraw Pounds abroad as Sterling crashes following Brexit

2016-06-24

GETTY

The value of the Pound is falling too quickly for exchanges to keep up with the volatile changes in exchange rates.

Australia's largest bank, CommBank, has stopped exchanging British pounds following the result.

They said: "Due to results from the British exit referendum we're suspending foreign exchange of GBP pound until further notice."

It's beginning already! We're in Greece, no cash exchange & no cash machine withdrawals for Brits. Great #brexitfail pic.twitter.com/9dG0LnhSCB

Other people have been left stranded without cash as they try to get spending money for their holidays.

Small businesses have reported that they are waiting for exchange rates to stabalise before they start trading again.

One Brit abroad, Matt Rooney, tweeted his despair at not being able to withdraw cash.

“We're in Greece, no cash exchange & no cash machine withdrawals for Brits”

He said: "It's beginning already! We're in Greece, no cash exchange & no cash machine withdrawals for Brits. Great."

Matt also tweeted a photo of a sign hung on a wall of the resort.

It read: "Dear guests, We would like to inform you that we cannot exchange British or Scottish pounds at the moment, as we do not have an official exchange rate from the central bank."

Consumer Director of HolidayTravelWatch Frank Brehany is concerned that the referendum decision might negatively affect the travel Consumer Rights of UK holidaymakers.

He said: "Forty years of work now hangs in the balance and the loss of any or all of these rights will ultimately cost the consumer through lost opportunities of enforcement to a lost opportunity to enjoy a better regulated holiday product.

"Throughout the referendum campaign we tried to give consumers clear guidance on the options before them, but we were unable to do so because neither campaign provided any information on what would happen to Consumer Rights in the event of either a Norway or Independent Brexit; we will begin to see how this will play out for Consumers in the coming months."

He continues: "Some have said that the UK government, free of Brussels could replicate lost laws.

"Our experience of Westminster reveals a Parliament less keen on what happens with consumers and more interested in the 'rights' of industry. For our part, we shall do all we can to make sure the consumer voice is heard."

After the referendum result was confirmed this morning the bottom fell out of the Pound as it crashed to a 30-year low.

GETTY

GETTY

By 10.15am it had recovered somewhat to trade at 7% lower on the day.

The Bank of England's announcement that they will pledge Sterling with £250bn extra support.

Traders cited this as the reason for a slight restoration in market confidence.

