Jeremy Clarkson and James May back REMAIN – say Brexit could ruin their new TV show

2016-06-21

The old friends made the video for the Britain Stronger in Europe campaign, to encourage people to vote against Brexit on June 23rd.

The presenters – best known for their motoring rivalry – argued that leaving Europe would badly impact their new Amazon Prime show, The Grand Tour.

"It annoys me actually, I'll be honest, because I want to remain in Europe but that means agreeing with him," Jezza joked.

May said: "Yeah, this is very uncharacteristic. We've had to put aside the normal policy of our TV show and our relationship and agree on something apart from that 'the Ford Mondeo is a good car'."

YOUTUBE

“We've had to put aside the normal policy of our relationship and agree on something apart from the Ford Mondeo is a good car”

The only things the pair agreed on, in fact, were the Ford Mondeo, sandwich spread and Britain staying a member of the European Union.

Jeremy said: "Making our TV show – which is called the Grand Tour and involves touring the world and a lot of Europe – if we weren’t in Europe we’d have to get a carnet every single time we wanted to go to any one of these countries and that would take 100 years."

James added: "To get our car across that stretch of water [between Britain and France] – 21 miles I believe – would involve a pile of paperwork big enough to build a bridge."

The video was uploaded after numerous celebrities have come out giving their backing to either the Leave or Remain sides.

Inventor Sir James Dyson has backed Brexit while serial entrepreneur Sir Richard Branson is firmly in the Remain camp.

BRITAIN STRONGER IN EUROPE

While reality-show favourite Joey Essex has even had his say – quizzing former Labour leader Ed Miliband about the French "nicking our fish".

Opinion polls in the last few weeks have shown the Leave campaign leading the pack but just days before the 23rd June vote, latest figures suggest there has been a swing towards Remain.

An online poll from YouGov, of more than 1,600 people between 16 and 17 June, put Remain on 44% and Leave on 43%.

If Britain does quit the EU, the nation will change forever – we’ve put together a handy run-down so you can tell exactly what impact Brexit would have on you, your family and friends.

