Britain boom: UK set for £6billion  — regardless of Brexit

2016-06-24

PA/EPA

Investors have been holding back on ploughing mammoth sums into the nation.

They’ve been sitting on major infrastructure and business investments until the result is in the bag and jittery markets settle again.

But now that the vote is done and dusted they’re ready to splurge.

And we’re all winners as experts predict a £6bn boost for businesses and new jobs.

More good news is that Brussels is set to rip up their EU master-plan on the back of our referendum.

Polls last night put the battle between Remain and Leav neck-and-neck as leaders from both sides, including Remain’s David Cameron and Leave’s Michael Gove, Boris Johnson and Nigel Farage cast their votes.

“We shouldn’t be surprised if there is an economic bounce after the referendum whatever the result”

The Centre for Economic and Business Research yesterday said investors will plough £5.9 billion into Britain this summer.

They will splurge about half into computer investments and the rest into construction and equipment.

CEBR boss Douglas McWilliams said: “We shouldn’t be surprised if there is an economic bounce after the referendum whatever the result.”

Regardless of the result of our referendum, EU bosses are ready to draw up a new blueprint after our debates on the future of the bloc.

Mr Cameron’s push for treaty reform has tapped a mood of anger with Brussels across Europe.

Polls show a surge of calls for member states, including France and Italy, to have their own say on going it alone.

Belgian leader Charles Michel yesterday said: “There is this clear signal all over Europe, not only in Britain, of discontent.”

The six founding members of the EU will gather in Berlin tomorrow for crunch talks in a desperate bid to save the EU from imploding.

German fi nance minister Wolfgang Schäuble admitted this week: “Europe is not in good shape.

“Even if a majority decide to stay we cannot continue as before, otherwise people will say, ‘You’ve not understood’.”

