'Blame the rain' Pro-Remain voters petitioning for ANOTHER referendum after Brexit win

2016-06-24

  GETTY/SWNS

After the vote went down to the wire with 52% for Leave and 48% to Remain, with just just 1.3 million votes between them as 33 million Brits went to the polls.

Angry Remain voters have launched a petition calling for a second referendum after the Brexit victory – which has seen David Cameron announce he his quitting as PM and Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn face the axe.

More than 100,000 people have signed the call on Parliament's website within hours of the result, crashing the government site.

The government's petition rules mean the proposal will now be considered for a Parliamentary debate.

 PARLIAMENT

Lower turnout than expected in London because of bad weather? If you don't vote because of rain you deserve this

 WENN

Turnout for the referendum was 72%, lower than the 80% prediction which was predicted by election organisers – leading some to speculate yesterday's deluge of rain affected the result.

UKIP leader Nigel Farage yesterday encouraged "soft" Remain voters to stay at home as Remain heartlands suffered a washout.

A thread posted on Reddit called all those who did not vote because of the weather "c****".

Some users posted Remain supporters were so confident of victory that they did not bother to vote, while one quipped "Great Britain leaves the EU because of the rain...that is the most British thing I have ever heard".

One user replied: "Yeah, but you cannot solve this with a cuppa". 

72% turnout for #brexit vote, on account of rain. Wonder what's going through the minds of the 28%... Anyone thought of umbrellas?

 “Great Britain leaves the EU because of the rain...that is the most British thing I have ever heard”

The vast majority of petition signees are concentrated in London and areas in the south including Brighton and Hove, Bristol, Canterbury and Winchester.

The petition, called EU Referendum Rules triggering a 2nd EU Referendum, says "We the undersigned call upon HM Government to implement a rule that if the remain or leave vote is less than 60% based a turnout less than 75% there should be another referendum."

Twitter already reacted with fury to the result as people woke to the dawn of Brexit Britain. 

If we vote to leave because the rain has been affecting turnout, it will possibly be the most British thing ever. #Brexit #EUref

This morning has seen the chaos of Brexit unfolding as the pound crashes and the public wonder how it will affect their lives. 

US presidential wannabe Donald Trump backed the Brexit and said David Cameron's resignation was "too bad", while EU bosses encouraged Britain to hurry up and get out.

Celebs also reacted on social media, with Lily Allen going on a foul-mouthed tirade against health minister Jeremy Hunt. 

