'No need for haste' BoJo hails Brexit win but tight-lipped on bid for PM's job

2016-06-24

GETTY/SG

“It was his bravery that gave this country the first EU referendum in 41 years”

He has described David Cameron as a "brave and principled" man and expressed sorrow at his decision to resign after the Brexit vote.

The Tory MP said: "He is an extraordinary politician of our age.

"It was his bravery that gave this country the first EU referendum in 41 years."

The Tory MP arrived at Leave headquarters on the Embankment at around 10am.

Mr Johnson moved to reassure people concerned about the process of Brexit, insisting that there was no need to invoke Article 50 - the procedure which triggers a fixed two-year countdown to leaving the EU.

"There is no need for haste," he said. "As the Prime Minister has just said, nothing will change over the short term except that work will have to begin on how to give effect to the will of the people and to extricate this country from the supranational system."

Despite the geographical divisions in the votes to leave or remain which saw Scotland back continued membership of the EU, Mr Johnson said: "To those who may be anxious, whether at home or abroad, this does not mean that the United Kingdom will be in any way less united, nor indeed does it mean that it will be any less European."

Shortly after leaving his posh west London pad Mr Johnson was trapped by a crowd of cyclists and onlookers as he was driven to the Vote Leave headquarters.

BoJo's car was halted for around five minutes while insults were thrown and police officers who had been guarding his home were nowhere to be seen.

A crowd of roughly forty cyclists and bystanders blocked a junction, taunting him with "where are you going Boris?".

This came as fellow Tory and Prime Minister David Cameron emerged from 10 Downing Street to make an emotional resignation speech.

DS

TWITTER/SG

It was a less dignified scene outisde Bojo's house.

As he came out the crowd shouted "Scum!" and hurled other profanities at Mr Johnson as his car was trapped in front of a green light, unable to move.

One man yelled: "The pound is down, what do you say about that? Is it going to be all right, Boris?

"Is the UK going to be all right, Boris?

"Are we going to be all right, mate? Come on, man up."

