EU referendum: Footie stars may be booted out after Brexit vote, warns Premier League boss

2016-06-22

  GETTY

Currently EU membership allows European stars to easily sign for Premier League teams.

But Brexit could curb their freedom of movement – meaning some players will not automatically qualify for work permits.

According to a study, 332 European players currently playing in the Premier League, Championship and Scottish Premiership would fail to meet the non-EU criteria if the UK quits the EU.

 GETTY

 “West Ham would have four players who would not automatically qualify for work permits should Britain vote to leave ”

With latest polls indicating a slight lead for Brexit, Mr Gold tweeted his concern, pointing out: "West Ham would have four players who would not automatically qualify for work permits should Britain vote to leave the European Union."

France's Euro hero so far Dimitri Payet along with Pedro Obiang, Angelo Ogbonna and goalkeeper Adrian are the four in question.

Other teams that could be hit badly are Arsenal – who face losing eight players.

They are Francis Coquelin, Mathieu Flamini, Mikel Arteta, Hector Bellerin, Nacho Monreal, Tomas Rosicky, Laurent Koscielny and Serge Gnabry.

Manchester United would lose six players and Manchester City would see four struggling..

Richard Scudamore, the executive chairman of the Premier League, said he was against leaving because the EU suited UK teams.

He said: "There is an openness in the Premier League that is incongruous with leaving the EU."

But Brian Monteith of the Leave.eu campaign argued Brexit would actually create more recruitment opportunities for clubs.

"The freedom of movement for people in the EU comes at the price of heavy restrictions on visas for potential signings from Africa, the Caribbean, South America and Asia," he told the BBC.

"Once we leave the EU, the UK will be free to treat footballers from all countries equally, which will broaden the pool of talent for our teams, not reduce it."

Fears for British footie come as a host of celebs voice their opinions, showing they are as divided about Brexit as the rest of us.

It is set to go the wire – don’t expect the bookies to payout much.

Decision day is tomorrow and you will be able to cast your EU referendum vote at your local polling station between 7am and 10pm.

There will be one question: "Should the United Kingdom remain a member of the European Union or leave the European Union?"

Meanwhile sex-mad couples have elected to have a Brexit bonkathon, with an orgy of wife-swapping as the nation goes to the polls on the Brexit referendum.

