BREXIT CRASH: Bank of England puts up £250bn to rescue plunging Pound

2016-06-24

  EPA/REUTERS

Governor Carney from the Bank of England said that there will be a period of "certainty and adjustment" where it may take some time for the UK "to establish relationships with Europe and the rest of the world".

The shock result sent Sterling into a record fall of more than 10% against the Dollar.

This plunge is easily the biggest fall in Sterling in living memory as it's set to hit its lowest value since 1985.

 investing.com

In the first few minutes of trading the FTSE 100 fell by 8%, stunning global markets.

Experts are warning that worse is to come.

Joe Rundle, head of trading at ETX Capital, said: "The Pound has collapsed to its lowest level in over 30 years, suffering its biggest one-day fall in living memory.

 “These are once-in-a-lifetime moves, bigger than Lehmans and Black Wednesday”

He added: "Never seen anything like it. These are once-in-a-lifetime moves, bigger than Lehmans and Black Wednesday, and we haven't even had the result yet."

Around the globe markets are making nervous moves in reaction to the news.

Against the Euro, the Pound dropped 7% to around €1.2085, while the Euro also fell 3.3% against the dollar.

While oil and commodities were battered by the result, shares in gold have jumped nearly 7%.

The Euro in turn slid 3.4% to $1.0997 as investors feared for the future economic security of the European Union.

Meanwhile over in the US the Dow Jones Industrial Average has plummeted more than 400 points as global markets decended into chaos.

 EPA

Mike Ellingsen, a stock trader at U.S. Global Investors Inc at San Antonio in Texas,said: "It's going to be ugly in the morning.

"This is going to catch a lot of people wrong footed, end of discussion. Obviously markets were not pricing this in."

The Bank of England has said it is "well prepared" and it will take "all necessary steps" to ensure monetary and financial stability in the wake of the Brexit vote.

Leaders around the world have given their verdict on the result of the referendum.

 EPA

 PA

A spokesperson added: "It has undertaken extensive contingency planning and is working closely with Her Majesty's Treasury, other domestic authorities and overseas central banks."

Kathleen Brooks, research director at City Index, said: "Financial markets seriously under-estimated the possibility of a Brexit; the Pound may have fallen in the lead up to the vote, but not to the lows that it has reached today.

"We expect further falls, however the outlook is extremely uncertain.

 PA

"If David Cameron can remain as Prime Minister for the next few months then he will push for a trigger of article 50, which will start the process of leaving the EU immediately."

Meanwhile shares in the UK's biggest bank, HSBC, plummeted by 11% and Standard Chartered, a British bank focussing on Asia lost nearly 12%.

British holidaymakers abroad have reported finding it difficult to withdraw Euros as the market continues to fluctuate. 

David Cameron has announced that it is his intention to resign after Britain's decision to leave the European Union.

