George Osborne to go next? Chancellor silent on future and says he'll 'make Brexit work'

2016-06-24

  GETTY

The Chancellor has not make a public appearance since the result was announced, but confirmed that he would "respect decision of British people" and do all he could to "make it work". 

Osborne added that banks across the world have taken drastic measures to ensure stability in the global economy.

The decision has plunged financial markets into meltdown – impact everyone from city traders to holidaymakers.

The shock result sent Sterling falling to its lowest value since 1985.

Investors panicked as the pound plummeted over night – falling by 10% against the American Dollar.

Osborne's threat last week to impose an emergency Brexit budget of deeper austerity prompted a furious backlash from Leave MPs.

Critics are now questioning whether he will be following his friend David Cameron out of government. 

Brits abroad struggled to withdraw currency.

But Conservative Chancellor Osborne has moved to reassure worried investors.

Osborne – who is a close favourite to replace David Cameron as Tory Party leader has spoken to leaders from the G7.

The G7 is made up of some of the world's biggest economies – the US, Canada, Japan, Italy, Germany, France and the UK.

 GETTY

In a series of tweets, Osborne said: "Just briefed G7 finance ministers and bank governors on outcome of EU referendum. They all respect the decision of the British people.

"G7 central banks have taken steps to ensure adequate liquidity and to support functioning of markets. Her Majesty's Treasury and the Bank of England will be monitoring the situation closely."

He added: "It was a hard fought campaign. It is not the outcome I wanted but I respect decision of British people and will do all I can to make it work."

 PA

 GETTY

It comes after the Bank of England's governor Mark Carney stated that Britain would have to undergo a massive period of "adjustment".

The Bank of England has stumped up an extra £250bn following the result.

