Under-fire Jeremy Corbyn rejects calls to resign after Labour MPs blast EU efforts

2016-06-24

Britain has voted to the leave the European Union, Prime Minister David Cameron has resigned, and the chaos of the day after Brexit is taking hold.

But despite the massive upheaval, with the pound plummeting and everyone asking 'what happens now?', the Labour Leader has said he is staying where he is.

MPs are calling for their leader to step down after a "sneering" and passionless campaign to save Britain's place in Europe.

Corbyn faces a vote of no confidence tabled by MPs Margaret Hodge and Ann Coffey, and there have been reports of an attempted coup during this morning's Shadow Cabinet meeting.

The Labour leader has swiftly dismissed the motion as a "self-indulgent" act, but he has abandoned a scheduled appearance at the Glastonbury music festival.

GETTY

A source in the Labour party told Daily Star Online: "He should step down for someone who can better get Labour's message across."They added: "At times during the referendum campaign – like when he went on holiday – it felt like he was sneering at us.

"I put my heart and soul into this and so did actvists, but Jeremy didn't."

Another senior source described the mood within the party as one of "utter devastation".

It is understood the Labour rebels have enough votes to pass the motion of no confidence overwhelmingly.

Dame Margaret urged Mr Corbyn to "do the decent thing" and stand down in the way the PM has.

"The European referendum was a test of leadership and I think Jeremy failed that test," she told Sky News.

"He came out too slowly, he was very half-hearted about his attempts to campaign and Labour voters simply didn't get the message."

“I can't believe there's any attacks on me personally on a day like this”

The Telegraph reported there is currently a backlash amongst MPs against the Labour leader.

This comes after a leaked script showed the party was trying to position him as a "critical" figure in unifying Britain in the wake of the referendum.

This morning Corbyn rejected reports that MPs are blaming him for the defeat.

He said: "I can't believe there's any attacks on me personally on a day like this".

Speaking to Sky News, the Labour leader said he was not going to quit – simply replying "no" when asked.

He said: "We accept the result obviously. The country has been divided but has made a decision.

"We now have to organise how we leave the EU and crucially how we develop a strong economic relationship we Europe and other parts of the world as jobs rely on that."

He added the country has an "urgent economic challenge to deal with".

Later in the day the Labour leader elaborated further, telling Channel 4 News that he was "making the case for unity".

He added: "I'm making the case of what Labour can offer to Britain, of decent housing for people, of good secure jobs for people, of trade with Europe and of course with other parts of the world.

"Because if we don't get the trade issue right we've got a real problem in this country."

GETTY

The Huffington Post reports MPs feel that Corbyn made a mistake by stressing the benefits of immigration instead of focusing on workers' rights.

A 'key member' of the Britain Stronger in Europe campaign told the website: “Jeremy hasn’t pulled his weight. Even if we had won, it would have been despite not because of him.”

An MP told HuffPost: “The EU referendum simply shone a light on how utterly out of touch Corbyn and McDonnell are with so many traditional Labour voters outside of London.

"Jeremy made the biggest issue of concern for traditional Labour voters thinking of voting Leave - ie the impact of freedom of movement - his almost sole reason why Britain should remain. It was a sort of political suicide of genius proportions."

