Boris Johnson: Let’s free ourselves from Europe's shackles by voting OUT in the referendum

2016-06-19

GETTY

We will continue to be engaged with Europe; we will never cease to be a great European power, but you don’t have to do it through the institutions of the EU, which I think are very undemocratic.

How I see it is that we have got four days left to save Europe.

Unless we vote for change it will go on and on in a totally undemocratic way.

This is our moment when the British people take centre stage in history, this is when the eyes of Europe are on us and I think hundreds of millions of people are praying we will do the right thing and vote for change because they are locked in a system incapable of change.

GETTY

I think if we do this we will be speaking up for democracy in Britain and in Europe and it will be a fine thing that will echo through the ages.

It is four days to an independence day and until we speak up for freedom.

As a country we love Europe; we love the European continent and civilisation; we will always be attached to it; we will always be friendly and supportive but we have got to stop being enmeshed in a bureaucratic and top down undemocratic system of government.

I believe it is an unshackling of Britain.

GETTY

We have now got four days to take those chains off.

If this was a club and you were being asked to join now would you dream of doing it?

The answer is no.

So why stay in?

Let’s get out and drive change.

I think this is a once-in-a-lifetime chance to take back control from the unelected, undemocratic, unaccountable and unreformed EU.

There is no time in our history when we have suffered by making our politics more accountable and more democratic and I hope that we seize this chance on Thursday to take Britain forward.

GETTY

“This is a moment when the British people should trust themselves ”

This is a moment when the British people should trust themselves and should believe in this country’s democratic institutions and should back themselves.

We can never go wrong by backing ourselves.

The first thing to do is begin by repealing sections two and three of the European Communities Act 1972 so you reestablish the supremacy of Parliament.

You can also begin work on an Australian-style points based immigration system which would be fair to people coming from all parts of the world – not just from the EU but also outside the EU as well.

GETTY

I don’t like extremism, I don’t like the far-right parties that you are seeing coming up across Europe.

But I think the problem with immigration is politicians have promised they can control it when legally they can’t because we are in the EU.

You can only spike the guns of the extremists if you take back control because I think it’s the public sense of the loss of control that is leading to so much disquiet.

