REVEALED: £80bn of taxpayer cash at risk on EU bad loans

2016-06-19

GETTY

Analysis for the Bruges Group by banking expert Bob Lyddon warns the UK could be forced to pay for the bad loans and decisions made by the European Investment Bank and the European Central Bank, as well as paying for overspending by Brussels.

The UK part owns the EIB, which he says has been granting aggressive, high-risk loans to groups outside of the EU to support Brussels’ “political objectives”.

As a result, Lyddon warns that if the EIB’s loans backfire, the UK could forced to part fund a bailout of the lender.

PH

The analysis also states that as a shareholder of the European Central Bank, the Bank of England would potentially be liable for the actions of ECB Governor Mario Draghi, who has promised to spend vast sums of money to fix Europe’s economic woes.

“EU membership poses the biggest risk to the British taxpayer. Leaving the EU is the safer option”

Although the ECB only has small sums of capital at its disposal, Draghi has promised to fire a financial “bazooka” to fix the Eurozone problems. Lyddon warns that as a backer of the ECB, the Bank of England could have to contribute more funds to it for Draghi to be able to keep his promises.

Between the EIB and the ECB, the UK has more than £30billion at risk.

However that sum is dwarfed by the amount the UK could be forced to inject to make up for any deficit in the European budget due to the weak state of the Eurozone economy.

Under EU rules, there cannot be a budget deficit. If one occurs, it has to be made up by contributions from member states.

The Lyddon analysis warns that as one of the largest and most credit worthy members of the EU, international lenders would expect us to stump up the money when required.

There is no right of refusal. Robert Oulds, director of the Bruges Group, said: “The Brexit team are taking a small gamble on tariffs.

"EU membership poses the biggest risk to the British taxpayer. Leaving the EU is the safer option."

