Nigel Farage says Jo Cox death has hit Brexit chances amid fury over 'vile' migrant poster

2016-06-19

Mr Farage's comment came amid a row over a poster showing migrants walking through countryside with the slogan "breaking point".

Chancellor George Osborne branded it "vile" and accused the UKIP chief of "whipping up division".

Leading Leave campaigner Michael Gove distanced himself from the poster, saying it made him shudder.

Mr Farage said he had been the "victim" of hatred, and suggested that the migrant poster row would not be taking place if Remain backer Jo Cox had not been killed on Thursday.

Speaking on ITV1's Peston on Sunday, Mr Farage said: "I think we have momentum.

ITV/PA

“I think I have been a politician who has been a victim of it, to be honest with you”

"We did have momentum until this terrible tragedy. It has had an impact on the whole campaign for everybody.

"When you are taking on the establishment, you need to have momentum. I don't know what's going to happen over the course of the next three to four days, but this was the action of one person with serious mental issues. What we saw was an act of terrorism."

Mr Osborne denounced Mr Farage's poster – released just hours before the attack on Mrs Cox, and already the subject of complaints to the police over alleged racism – as "disgusting and vile".

"There are perfectly legitimate concerns about migration, concerns that are felt in every Western democracy in the world," said the Chancellor.

"But I think there is a difference between addressing those concerns in a reasonable way and whipping up concerns, whipping up division, making baseless assertions that millions of people are going to come into the country in the next couple of years from Turkey, saying that dead bodies are going to wash up on the beaches of Kent, or indeed putting up that disgusting and vile poster that Nigel Farage did, which had echoes of literature used in the 1930s.

REUTERS

"That is what we should say 'No' to."

But Mr Farage rejected the charge of stoking up hatred, saying: "I think I have been a politician who has been a victim of it, to be honest with you.

"When you challenge the establishment in this country, they come after you, they call you all sorts of things. We saw the Chancellor a few minutes ago – despite the fact that overnight he talked about turning down the rhetoric - doing the same thing again."

Mr Gove told the BBC1 Andrew Marr Show: "When I saw that poster I shuddered. I thought it was the wrong thing to do.

"I am pro-migration but I believe that the way in which we secure public support for the continued benefits that migration brings and the way in which we secure public support for helping refugees in need is if people feel they can control the numbers overall coming here."

Labour former Cabinet minister Yvette Cooper said the debate over the poster was "incredibly depressing".

Ms Cooper said: "Nigel Farage is still trying to whip up fear and hatred towards refugees who are fleeing from conflict. I think it was extremely ill-judged of him to describe himself as a 'victim' today."

She said the rest of the Leave campaign should condemn the poster and should withdraw their own posters about the possibility of Turkey joining the EU.

Pro-Brexit minister Penny Mordaunt told Peston: "We have a huge problem in Europe, particularly in continental Europe, with the rise of extremist politics – and particularly far-right politics. That is a direct response to a democratic deficit. That's what we need to address."

