'God backs Brexit' Outrage as vicar uses sermon to peddle EU views

2016-06-19

GETTY

Paul Hedger told his congregation he would be voting to leave the EU on June 23.

He added: “I believe God has told us to do this.

“I do believe with all of my heart that God said you must do it. He said you must do it because as a church leader, as indeed as parents, whoever we are, silence is not an option.”

The sermon preached last Sunday at Isleham High Street Church in Isleham, Cambs has created quite a stir.

One angry parishioner walked out in protest.

“God's house is not for campaigning. The decisions we make about political issues must be kept away from the church.”

Others claim he was pushing his own political views but he defended his speech saying he had a responsibility to inform them of God's views.

One churchgoer, who did not want to be named, said: "The congregation was shocked to hear the lead pastor openly campaign for the Brexit camp.

"We go to church to pray and serve God and not be told how to vote in matters that have nothing to do with God.

"God's house is not for campaigning. The decisions we make about political issues must be kept away from the church.

"A person's vote must be their sole decision without any influence from the man of the cloth."

GETTY

In the sermon uploaded on the church’s website, Mr Hedger described the EU as anti-Christian.

He said “one of the worst traits of the EU” is that it did not protect the rights of the couple who owned the bakery and refused to serve a gay couple.

Mr Hedger added that EU claimed to protect religious freedom but then had amended it.

He read: “Although the right of freedom to have religious belief is absolute under Article 9 ECHR. The right to manifest that belief is subject to the rights of others.

“Why does religion has to submit? What they are saying is you can be a Christian as long as you are one secretly but you can’t express it.

SGGOOGLEMAPS

Mr Hedger then likened the EU to an empire which seeks to dissolve cultures and mix religions.

He said: “What is clear is that God loves nations but he takes a different view of empires.”

He also attacked the statue outside of the EU’s headquarters which depicts the Greek God Zeus, who is celebrated for raping a girl.

In the sermon, Mr Hedger admitted it was a "risky approach" to share his views but defended his actions.

He said: "All of us would want God's perspective and as followers, once you have God's perspective we have a responsibility as Christians to see it through God's eyes.

"We have to ask ourselves, how would God see it?"

Mr Hedger added: "I see it as the church's responsibility on issues that affect our lives to inform people.

"My aim with what I said was to help them see there may be a higher agenda above what politicians say.

"I would stand by everything I said and a lot of people from our church have been very supportive."

