The difference in online and phone polling for Brexit

2016-06-21

OPINION polling on whether the Brits want to stay in the EU had been inconclusive long before the Brexit campaign started. But what has become clear since early in the campaign is that different methodologies offer different results. Online polls have canvassed voters more often than telephone polling. This is mainly because of their relative ease, lower cost and quick turnaround. A detailed study of EU referendum polling by Populus concluded that while both methods had shortcomings, telephone polling, which favours Remain, tended to reflect the British public better when compared with the online alternative, which favours Leave. ICM, another pollster, started to simultaneously poll using both online and telephone methods in April. Even after post-fieldwork adjustments for each poll’s perceived failings the differences were in line with the Populus analysis.

Upgrade your inbox and get our Daily Dispatch and Editor's Picks.

Polling techniques explain some of this divergence. Removing a “Don’t know” option from the online questionnaire tilts results toward Remain.  And adjusting the sample to reflect the liberal hard-to-reach voters has the similar effect.

The fact that telephone polling seems more accurate gave confidence to the Remain campaign. The only big unknown was the undecided: around 15% of voters.  Yet previous studies seem to favour Remain’s cause here too. Several have shown that on election day late deciders tend to shift to favour of the status quo.



A swing to Leave in early June caused concern for the Remain campaign, big business and pro-Britain EU countries, as both online and telephone polling strengthened for Leave. The markets wobbled and sterling depreciated as one poll after another seemed to confirm the sudden change and the number of undecideds fell.  This week those concerns have receded, but the number of undecided voters crept up too. The margin of victory either way may not be decisive and nearly half the country may be left feeling short-changed, similar to the independence movement in Scotland after their vote in 2014 failed, but was still supported by 45% of Scots. One positive for Remain is that, irrespective of their own vote, a significant proportion of those polled think the country will remain in the EU. One can only hope those polling results are right.

See our Brexit poll tracker here.

