Brexit and the markets: a seismic shock

2016-06-24

INVESTORS are waking to a deeply unpleasant surprise. Despite the closeness of the opinion polls, most people seemed to think that the “status quo bias” would cause Britons to vote for Remain, especially as it was perceived to be in their economic self-interest. A remain vote was virtually priced in.

As soon as the results started to come in, the pound started to plunge. From around $1.50 before the polls closed, the pound dropped to $1.45, then $1.40, and then to $1.34, its lowest level since 1985. It was the worst day for sterling since the currency floated in the early 1970s. The shock was also reflected in equity markets, both within and outside Britain. The Nikkei 225 average in Tokyo has dropped 8%.

When London opened, there were big falls in housebuilding, retailing and banking shares (Barclays, Lloyds and RBS shares dropped 25-30%). The FTSE 100 dropped 500 points or 8% within minutes of the opening; Frankfurt’s DAX index fell 8.6%. S&P futures indicate a 5% decline when the markets open. In a classic “risk-off” move, the US Treasury 10-year bond yield fell a quarter of a point in overnight trading. When UK markets opened, the 10-year gilt yield fell by around a third of a point to 1.05%.

What explains the moves? Notoriously, investors never like uncertainty; now uncertainties abound. Who will be in charge of Britain’s government in the medium term? David Cameron, having urged a Remain vote, has indicated that he will resign by October. The finance minister, George Osborne, may go with him. A Brexit campaigner will take office, but they may lack a Commons mandate. Will that mean an election? What will be the future trading arrangements between Britain and the EU and how long will they take to negotiate? What will be the reaction of foreign businesses that invest in Britain? Will financial-services firms have to move staff to the EU? Will Scotland, which voted Remain, vote for independence? What will happen in Ireland, where the open border between north and south will now become the land border between Britain and the EU?

Uncertainty has real economic effects; businesses and investors are likely to postpone investment plans until the outcome is clear. UBS says that:

For the UK the immediate consequence is a significant rise in economic uncertainty, especially as the future of trading relationships between the UK & the EU is expected to remain unclear for some time. As a result we expect a further deceleration in growth, to around zero for a number of quarters

The pound’s fall reflects the idea that UK assets need to be cheaper to attract international investment. The UK current account deficit of 7% needs financing. Yes, a fall in the pound helps exporters. But businesses may decide to take the benefit of higher profits (their overseas sales will be worth more in sterling terms) rather than by cutting prices and increasing their market share. A fall in the pound in 2008-09 did not eliminate the deficit. In the short term, the deficit may go up; the cost of imports will rise.

The Bank of England will have to consider what to do about all this. Traditionally, central banks are expected to intervene to support their currencies. But the options look bad. The Bank doesn’t have lots of foreign-exchange reserves with which to buy the pound. And an interest-rate rise would damage the economy. So the Bank could decide to cut interest rates to cushion the economic impact. And it will have to look beyond the impact on inflation, which could go above the 2% target.

For Europe, the shock will also be profound. Britain will be the only major country (apologies to Greenland) to leave the EU. The solidarity of the EU has been diminished; already there have been calls for exit referendums in Denmark and the Netherlands. Disruption to British trade will also have some economic impact. The euro, while rising against the pound, has fallen against the dollar and yen.

Indeed, Japan is the place where a Brexit vote might lead to an imminent reaction. The yen touched Y100/$ overnight, a strengthening that will not be welcome in Tokyo, where the economy is weak and deflationary pressures remain. The Bank of Japan may be contemplating a response.

