The culpability of Jeremy Corbyn

2016-06-24

Just as the prime minister, David Cameron, has already announced his resignation as a result of the referendum vote, many are now questioning whether Jeremy Corbyn, the leader of the Labour Party, can survive.

The Labour leadership was in favour of remaining in the EU, yet the vote was lost in the Labour heartlands of the Midlands and north of England. In the north-east, a strong Labour area, the Remain vote was much weaker than expected. Many furious Labour politicians blame this squarely on Mr Corbyn. “Jeremy Corbyn has got to take responsibility,” said Angela Smith, a former shadow minister. “He should consider his position. He’s shown insufficient leadership.” Two Labour MPs, Margaret Hodge and Ann Coffey, have sent a letter to John Cryer, chair of the Parliamentary Labour Party (PLP), submitting a motion of no confidence in Mr Corbyn to be discussed at the next meeting of the PLP on June 27th. If Mr Cryer allows this motion to be debated, it could be followed by a secret ballot of Labour MPs the following day. This would be a strong expression of the lack of confidence in Mr Corbyn, even if it has no constitutional force to unseat him.

Upgrade your inbox and get our Daily Dispatch and Editor's Picks.

Labour critics accuse their leader of being at best half-committed to the cause, of doing much too little much too late, and of ignoring the main issue of concern to traditional Labour voters: immigration. The former Labour cabinet minister Lord Peter Mandelson put the boot into Mr Corbyn, telling an interviewer that he had been “travelling through the referendum with the handbrake on” and that he had failed to support his senior colleagues on the campaign trail. Furthermore, argued Lord Mandelson, his palpable failings during the referendum campaign were evidence of a more profound inability to “project his message”. Perhaps Mr Corbyn doesn’t have what it takes, he mused.

Lord Mandelson’s comments will be dismissed by Mr Corbyn’s supporters as just more grousing from the right wing of the party. But they reflect a wider anger and frustration with Mr Corbyn’s leadership. “Jeremy hasn’t pulled his weight”, said one Labour MP. “The EU referendum simply shone a light on how utterly out of touch Corbyn and [John] McDonnell [the shadow chancellor] are with so many traditional Labour voters outside of London.” Another MP said: “Even people who supported him have seen he is not up to it. He can’t motivate Labour voters, let alone persuade anyone else.” Labour MPs were amazed that a sheet of “talking points” prepared for them by head office on how to respond to the defeat asked them to claim that Corbyn had “led from the front” during the campaign, and that he was now “far closer to the centre of gravity of the British public than other politicians.”

Scorn from his backbenchers is not sufficient to displace Mr Corbyn. His position as Labour leader has always rested on his popularity among the party’s paid-up supporters rather than its MPs. The left-winger was elected in 2015 with an overwhelming mandate, winning 59.5% of the vote of party members and affiliated supporters. They may yet stand by their man.

All that would prove, however, is how far out of touch the activists are with Labour voters, especially in the north of England. This was a point made by John Mann, the MP for Bassetlaw in the east Midlands, one of the few Labour MPs who campaigned for a Brexit. “Labour has gone wrong,” he said immediately after the result, “by not being in touch with the voters.” Mr Mann’s critique must be particularly worrying for Mr Corbyn, as it comes not from his old foes on the right of the party, like the Blairite Lord Mandelson, but from the trade-union core. People like Mr Mann view Mr Corbyn’s brand of urban, cosmopolitan left-wing protest politics as thoroughly divorced from the Labour heartlands. The referendum has merely confirmed their worst fears.

Read more

All our Brexit coverage >>

