The sleep of union

2016-06-18

WHAT a difference a couple of opinion polls make. Few brows in Brussels have remained unfurrowed by the declining fortunes of the campaign to keep Britain inside the European Union. The prospect of Brexit, which to the panjandrums of the EU was always such a patent absurdity that it could never come to pass, has suddenly roared into plain view. “We’re reaching the point of no return,” says one diplomat.

Some Europeans have already begun to draw harsh lessons from the British experience. Wolfgang Schäuble, Germany’s finance minister and a decades-long champion of European integration, says that a Brexit, or even a narrow vote to “Bremain”, would be a warning to the EU “not to continue with business as usual”. Donald Tusk, who as president of the European Council chairs meetings of EU leaders in Brussels, argues that Utopian calls for a federal Europe are hastening the EU’s disintegration. Even Jean-Claude Juncker, the increasingly absent president of the European Commission (the bit of the EU that proposes laws) and a dyed-in-the-wool federalist, admits that the EU has become a meddlesome presence in the lives of its citizens.

Upgrade your inbox and get our Daily Dispatch and Editor's Picks.

Such debates will have no effect on the British referendum: the campaign is now locked into a domestic political logic that intersects only occasionally with reality. But in wider Europe they will resonate beyond June 23rd, regardless of the vote’s outcome. Britain’s is not the only European ruling class to have been shocked by a jolt of populist rage. Governments in Denmark and the Netherlands have lately lost referendums on EU matters; others, notably in France, conduct EU policy with at least one eye on their own Eurosceptic forces. Belatedly, and partially, Brussels is waking up to the threat.

A Brexit might not lead to a cascade of membership referendums, but it would be a huge fillip to anti-EU forces elsewhere, not least by demonstrating that membership is reversible. (This is one reason why other EU countries would offer Britain a lousy trade deal if it votes to leave.) Post-Brexit, Eurosceptic governments seeking concessions from the EU could also threaten to quit the club. Mainstream politicians would see political mileage in taking on Brussels: recent polls show anti-EU sentiment growing all over Europe. All this would give pause to the centralisers Mr Tusk decries.

Then again, the federalists’ strength has always been exaggerated, especially in Britain. The history of the EU is not, as supporters and detractors sometimes suggest, a Whiggish march towards ever-closer union, marked by a steady accretion of powers and a withering of the nation-state. As described in “The European Union: A Citizen’s Guide”, a provocative new book by Chris Bickerton, a Cambridge academic, the EU’s integration has proceeded in fits and starts, consumed by crises like de Gaulle’s “empty chair” of 1965, or even reversals, like the failed attempt to construct a west European army in the early 1950s. The great push came in the 1980s, when Jacques Delors, a French Socialist in charge of the European Commission, joined forces with Margaret Thatcher, Britain’s right-wing prime minister, to create the single market, a product of a peculiar alliance forged in unusual times.

It has been a bumpy ride since then. The single currency and the Schengen system of open borders are the most potent symbols of European integration. But each has been sorely tested by crises that have set nation against nation. Indeed, in recent years, as the EU has become largely a crisis-management forum, power has flowed back from Brussels institutions to national governments, particularly to a visibly reluctant Germany. “More Europe,” once the clarion call for federalists across the continent, now carries the quaint ring of an ancient hunting cry. Nightmares long ago replaced dreams as the nocturnal currency of Brussels.

The EU’s legislative machinery has largely been halted during the referendum campaign, lest it rouse Britain’s fearsome tabloids to anger over kettle regulation or another matter of vital national interest. It will soon kick back into gear, but at nothing like the pace of previous eras. Sometimes lost in the Brexit debate is the fact that the EU simply does a lot less these days. Much to the chagrin of green groups and other NGOs, the commission has slashed its number of legislative proposals. The increasing number of empty “resolutions” issued by the European Parliament tells you something about the lightening workload of MEPs. The EU budget is tiny—around 1% of GDP—and likely to remain so. The Brexiteers that rail against the insatiable appetites of Brussels are pushing at an open door.

Britain is not in the euro, and has little to do with EU migration policy. But the rest of Europe faces a conundrum: to prevent crises, it needs more of the centralisation that Eurosceptics hate. The euro zone, particularly the banking union, remains half-built and may not withstand another financial crisis. The layers of dust grow thicker on last year’s Five Presidents’ Report, a stalled road map for euro-zone integration. On migration, last year’s drama exposed the weakness of a borderless space with wildly varying asylum policies. Naval patrols and foreign deals can go only so far; in time the EU will have to integrate its asylum policies.

Do not expect drastic action if Britain votes to leave. The differences between creditors and debtors that have long stymied euro-zone integration are as entrenched as ever: Germany firmly opposes a common deposit-insurance scheme, for example. Upcoming elections in France and Germany will stay politicians’ hands for at least 18 months. If Brexit unleashes financial chaos the euro zone will, as always, turn first to the European Central Bank. Still, whether or not Britain remains, the dilemma confronting the EU is growing more acute. To see off the next crisis, the train of integration will have to keep moving. But ever more voters are standing athwart the locomotive, yelling “Stop!”

