For hard-line Protestants, leaving Europe is a matter of eschatology

2016-06-24

IN NORTHERN IRELAND, where a majority of citizens voted to remain in the European Union, there is a small but still significant share of the electorate who will be rejoicing over the result on religious grounds. Among some devoutly evangelical Protestants, the referendum has been viewed as a playing out of religious prophecy. The most widely quoted chapter is Revelations 18, in which an angel cries triumphantly that the evil empire of Babylon has fallen after "all the nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her fornication." The verse on which preachers have focused is Revelations 18:4.

And I heard another voice from heaven, saying: "Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues."

In April, as campaigning for the referendum got underway, a conspicuous slogan urging people to vote for Brexit in the name of that verse appeared on a gable in Tigers Bay, a loyalist area on the north side of Belfast. In a small market town in the west of Northern Ireland, an evangelical group took over a premises on the main street and covered the front in posters urging people to vote "leave" or risk their souls by opting for a political institution which plainly stood for the Antichrist, an impostor whose appearance is a harbinger of the final battle before all earthly things come to end. Along with references to that Revelation verse, there were some secular promises. Britain, freed of Euro-shackles, could strike lucrative trade deals with the world's rising powers. Some readers wondered what purpose such economic projects could serve if the end times are so close.

Using the eschatological parts of the Bible to denounce pan-European institutions is a long-standing trope in Ulster Protestant rhetoric. It was a recurring theme in the sermons of Ian Paisley, the preacher-politician who dominated Ulster Protestant politics for decades before striking a peace deal with his declared adversaries. He often alluded to Revelations chapter 17, which describes a depraved woman, the whore of Babylon, sitting upon a horrific, multi-headed, multi-horned scarlet-coloured beast. In Paisley's imagery, the Catholic church was the whore, and the European Union was the beast. Such language is heard in ultra-Protestant circles elsewhere in the world, but Northern Ireland is probably the only place where it has come anywhere close to the political mainstream.

Followers of Paisley drew support for this belief from the fact that images of a woman riding a bull feature in sculptures and murals around Brussels and Strasbourg, and on one of the euro coins minted in Greece. These images actually depict Europa, the Phoenician woman who in Greek mythology was abducted by Zeus: the god took the form of a bull in order to impregnate her and conceive King Minos. You may well ask whether the rape of a young lady by a bull-like creature is an edifying symbol for a multi-national enterprise. But this is a pagan image, not a Christian one. And pedants will point out that Zeus took the form of a white bull, not a scarlet one.

Read more

All our Brexit coverage >>

