How we calculated our extrapolated Brexit vote shares

2016-06-23

ELECTION nights usually mean instant gratification: exit-poll results are often available immediately after the last vote is cast. But tonight’s referendum on Britain’s membership of the EU is an exception. Because no similar ballot has been held since 1975, mainstream media organisations decided there were not enough historical data to justify commissioning an exit poll. As a result, the final result will not be known until the losing side is mathematically eliminated. If the vote is close, that will be long after the sun rises on June 24th.

Hours before a winner is declared, however, it will be possible to reach a reasonable expectation of the likely outcome. That is because the data from early-reporting areas contain two separate types of information. In addition to hard vote totals that count towards the result, they also offer precious clues about what to expect from regions that have not yet announced their figures. The Economist has built a simple statistical model that extrapolates the numbers from ballots that have already been reported to produce an estimate of the margin among those that haven’t.

Our method relies on one central assumption: that after accounting for demographic and geographic variation, voters in different counting areas will behave similarly. Although polls suggest that some parts of Britain strongly support “remain” and others are equally determined to “leave”, most of these differences can be explained either by region—Scots are fonder of the EU than the residents of the English Midlands, for example—or by voter characteristics such as age, education, political-party affiliation and social class. In parliamentary elections, such patterns have proven fairly stable: if a few locales with high proportions of young voters lean strongly towards, say, Labour, others in the same region with a similar age profile tend to do so as well.

We produce our projections by blending data available ahead of the election with the results as they come in. First, we combine the consensus betting-market prediction for the overall result—54.8% “remain”—with the demographic characteristics of each counting area to produce a baseline forecast. For example, on the eve of the vote, we expect that 60% of voters in Tendring, a working-class part of Essex that strongly supported UKIP at the last election, will opt for “leave”. In contrast, we project that just 20% will do so in Edinburgh, a highly educated Scottish city.

Then, once the first votes are reported, we will adjust our demographic modelling so that our projections match the early totals. If, say, counting areas that report within the first two hours and have a large share of university graduates happen to support “leave” more than we previously expected, we will increase our forecast for later-reporting areas that also demonstrate above-average educational attainment.

It’s important to note that this model is only as good as the data it is fed and the assumptions it rests on. There is no guarantee that the choices of voters in one part of the country will closely reflect those of residents elsewhere who happen to share a similar demographic profile. And one should never underestimate the electorate’s capacity to spring surprises—particularly when voting on an issue that has not been on a ballot in over 40 years. For that reason, we are calling these estimates an “extrapolation” from early-reporting counting areas rather than an outright “prediction”. Place any last-minute wagers at your peril.

A more detailed account of our methodology follows below.

Technical appendix

We calculate the probability of Brexit via three main steps. The first is to produce a pre-election forecast—a prior, in Bayesian parlance—for the likely vote share in every counting area. We started with a sample of 5,500 responses to recent polls on the referendum conducted by YouGov. We ran a logistic regression of people’s voting intentions against five predictors: age, education, social class, voting at the 2015 general election and geographic region. On the whole, people who are older, less educated, of a lower social class and support the Conservatives or UKIP are likelier to support Brexit, particularly if they live in England but not in London. Relying on the British Election Study (BES), we conducted a similar regression on each group’s likelihood of showing up to vote at the 2015 general election.

Next, we estimated the proportions for each of these categories for the electorate in each counting area, based on data from the BES and the most recent census. For the district of Tendring, for example, we calculate that just 16% of potential voters have completed university and 82% are over 35, while the combined vote for the Tories and UKIP in 2015 was 76%. In Edinburgh, the corresponding figures were 43% university graduates, 64% over age 35 and 17% support for UKIP plus the Conservatives. By feeding these figures into our logistic models, we calculated an expected turnout and “leave”/”remain” split for each counting area.

After repeating this exercise for every counting area and adding up the results, we concluded that this method was probably systematically under-representing “remain” supporters. It suggested that “leave” would win the referendum comfortably—precisely the opposite conclusion from the one reached by betting markets, which see “remain” as the overwhelming favourite. To bring our estimates in line with the wisdom of crowds—if you think you’re smarter than a prediction market, think again—we simply reduced the projected “leave” share by the same amount in every counting area, so that our national forecast matched the bookmakers’ expectation of 54.8% for “remain”.

Once the results start to come in, we will update these priors to account for new information. After about 10% of the electorate has reported, we will conduct an ordinary-least-squares linear regression on the log odds of turnout and vote share in each counting area whose results are known. The independent variables will be all of the demographic characteristics of the area, its region and our prior projection. Every time new figures come in, we will re-run this analysis, yielding a fresh set of ever-more-accurate measures of the underlying relationships between our predictors and voters’ decisions. We expect that the weight on the prior will decrease rapidly once the model has access to even small samples of actual results.

