Stefan Zweig in exile: A European in Brazil

2016-06-22

SOME writers’ lives—and deaths—prove to be more enduring than their works. One of them is Stefan Zweig, born to Jewish parents in Vienna in 1881, whose short stories and historical biographies made him a literary celebrity in Europe and beyond before the second world war. The rise of the Nazis, who banned his books, drove him into exile. Crushed by the destruction of Europe, his “spiritual homeland”, he eventually settled in Brazil, where he and his young wife committed suicide together in February 1942 by swallowing poison. These final years have inspired books such as French novelist Laurent Seksik’s "The Last Days" and German literary critic Volker Weidermann’s "Summer before the Dark", set in Ostend in 1936. Now they are revisited in a new film, "Vor der Morgenröte" ("Before the Dawn"), an Austrian-German-French production directed by Maria Schrader. Rather than a linear biopic, it is a nuanced meditation on exile.

Set entirely in the Americas, the film assumes a bit of knowledge of Zweig, jumping past the celebrity years and the horrors of Nazism, and focusing on couple’s final months in Petropolis, some 70km outside Rio de Janeiro. The Europe that Zweig eternalised in his memoirs, "The World of Yesterday: Memories of a European", is gone. In its place is Brazil, which Zweig calls “land of the future”. He marvels at how its diverse inhabitants live peacefully side by side; “it seems like a miracle to us, coming from Europe,” says his wife Lotte, played with a quiet dignity by Aenne Schwarz. Though primarily in German, the film flits between languages with the ease of a Central European intellectual. Rather than a practical afterthought, language documents the Zweigs’ exile; at first, they chat to locals in rudimentary Spanish, only gradually picking up the Portuguese phrases of their adopted homeland.

Where other directors might have fallen into stuffiness or despair, Ms Schrader’s film retains a lightness. This owes something to the casting of Josef Hader, an Austrian comedian known for his cabaret acts, as Zweig. Yet even the funny moments bear the imprint of exile. In a key scene, a mayor deep in the state of Bahia hosts a reception in Zweig’s honour. After the mayor’s speech, a brass band in uniform launches into a shaky rendition of “The Blue Danube” waltz. Zweig listens stunned, caught between laughter and tears. The pulsing Brazilian landscape, with its bright greens and men in linen suits, only accentuates the darkness left behind. The contrast can be seen during a quick trip to snowy New York in early 1941, shot in cold blues and whites. “For today my life is black enough,” says Zweig when offered coffee there, his mounting anguish compounded by his inability to respond to all the requests to help other Jews get out of Europe.

In these snapshots of life and death in exile, some things are deliberately left unsaid. There are no shots of burning books, marching soldiers or camp inmates, yet these cast a shadow throughout the film. Just as the Zweigs follow the horror in Europe from across the Atlantic, the director keeps her distance from her characters. This subtlety continues to the final scene, reflected in a bedroom mirror. In his suicide note, Zweig hoped that his friends would “live to see the dawn” (giving the film its title).  Amid new uncertainty about the future of Europe, of which the Brexit referendum has been just one aspect, "Vor der Morgenröte" is a timely homage to a man who believed in it to the very end.

