Hoping that demography is not destiny

2016-06-22

ON JUNE 23rd Britons will head to the polls to answer a simple question they have not been asked since 1975: “Should the United Kingdom remain a member of the European Union or leave the European Union?” If the answer is “remain”, Britain will continue to integrate with the EU’s 27 other countries. If it chooses to “leave”, the Kingdom may split apart and begin to drift gently into mid-Atlantic obscurity.

“Remain” has led in the polls for almost the entirety of the campaign. In early June the “leave” side surged, and briefly appeared to have taken a decisive lead. But the tragic murder on June 16th of Jo Cox, a pro-EU member of Parliament, may have helped swing the polls again in recent days. On the surface, this has restored a narrow edge for “remain”. However, the share of people saying they intend to vote for “remain” has not actually increased. Instead, a sliver of the electorate has simply switched from “leave” to “don’t know”. With just one or two percentage points splitting the two sides, the outcome will depend largely on the 10-15% of voters who say they are still undecided.

Upgrade your inbox and get our Daily Dispatch and Editor's Picks.

In the hopes of anticipating how this group will behave at the ballot box, we obtained a sample of individual poll data covering 5,500 respondents from YouGov, a polling company. The responses were collected from April 29th to June 8th, with the bulk in early June. The undecided have a handful of distinctive characteristics. Their partisan affiliation tends to lean Conservative: they were 16% more likely than the rest of the sample to say they had supported the Tories in the 2015 general election. This makes intuitive sense, as the Conservative party is split over the EU. The “remain” camp, led by David Cameron, the prime minister, is being fought by Boris Johnson, his Oxford chum and the former Tory London mayor. People from lower social classes also appear to be on the fence, as they were 15% more likely to be undecided than the rest of the sample. This group is often less engaged in politics, which makes voting decisions difficult.

Next, we used this information to analyse the correlations between demographic attributes and stated voting intentions in the referendum. The five factors that best predicted the “leave”/“remain” margin were age, education, social class, how people voted in the 2015 general election and the region in which they live. For example, there is about a 65% chance that a 50-year-old Labour voter from the north of England, who finished education at 16 and is employed in routine work will support “Leave”. After measuring these relationships, we then estimated how people who “don’t know” would be likely to vote, on the assumption that they will follow the same patterns as those who do.

The data suggest age is the primary cleavage in the electorate (see chart 2). Looking specifically at middle-class adults with an A-level education, 70% of 18-24 year-olds in the English hinterland are expected to vote to “remain”, compared with just 30% of adults over 65 in the same region. Overall, however, these trends broadly cancel each other out. The demographic breakdown of the undecided suggests that, just like voters who do express a preference, they are split right down the middle. If YouGov’s sample weights are correct, then a 50-50 breakdown of “don’t knows” would be consistent with a three percentage-point victory for “leave”. (Although the  polling averages have shifted towards “remain” in the past week, the most recent YouGov poll gives “leave” the same two-point lead it had in our sample, suggesting that preferences among YouGov’s respondents have remained stable.)

Of course, there is no guarantee that the YouGov weights will match turnout on election day. No matter how rigorously the company calculates them—it accounts for demographics, past voting behavior and newspaper readership—such forecasts are always subject to error. The 2015 polls understated the Conservative vote share largely because they happened to under-sample Tory supporters relative to Labour ones. Rather than relying on a single estimate, we wanted to explore how a wider range of turnout scenarios might affect the outcome of the referendum.

To do so, we took micro-data from the 2011 British census, which covers 2.5m individual responses (5% of adults in the country), and applied our demographically derived proportions to its population counts, calculating the share of each group are likely to support “remain” and “leave”. Finally, we tweaked the result for turnout among different age groups, according to their numbers at the 2015 general election: 88% of Brits over 65 voted that May, compared with a dismal 57% for eligible under-35s. Young Britons will be handing victory to the “Leave” camp if they stay home in similar numbers on June 23rd.

A simple combination of 2015 turnout, census data and the demographic model based on the YouGov figures adds up to a nightmare for “remain”. These assumptions yield an electorate that is significantly older, less educated and poorer than YouGov expects. For example, YouGov projects that 21% of voters will be age 44 or younger and have studied past age 18—a strongly pro-“remain” cohort. In contrast, the census-and-2015 turnout method weights them at just 17%. Under these conditions, “leave” would be expected to win by fully ten percentage points (see chart 3). Simulating this result 10,000 times, using some generous assumptions about the uncertainty of polling, returns a probability of Britain staying in the EU of just 25%.

A “remainer” might retort that the 2015 general election is probably not a relevant precedent for the Brexit vote: turnout was far higher, for example, at Scotland’s 2014 independence referendum, where 80% of the young voted. Nonetheless, adding voters can be a double-edged sword. For every extra “remain” ballot from the young, there is likely to be another one for “leave” among the old: switching the model from using turnout from the 2015 general election to using the Scottish referendum only nudges up the “remain” share up by one percentage point. It is virtually impossible to project a victory for “remain” while using the census as a starting point. Even if the age pattern at the 2015 general election were to reverse—bringing turnout among the young up to 87%, while reducing it for the old to 57%—“remain” would still trail by six percentage points as long as the scenario’s other assumptions were left intact.

Fortunately for the “remain” side, a few important variables are absent from this forecast. First, it does not account for turnout differentials within age groups based on other categories, such as education or income. It also does not incorporate political party affiliation, which correlates strongly to voting behaviour. And it makes no effort to measure any potential “enthusiasm gap” that might make supporters of one side or the other more likely to show up to the polls.

Moreover, there are solid reasons to believe that such a worst-case scenario is rather improbable. In past elections, most recently in the Scottish referendum, late-deciding voters have leaned towards risk aversion and tended to favour the status quo. Voter registration figures suggest that youth turnout is likely to exceed that of 2015: of the 1.5m people who applied to join the electoral rolls in the week before registration closed, 900,000 were under 35. In Lewisham, a heavily pro-“remain” borough of London, the electorate has grown by 18% since last December. Betting markets have swung sharply towards “remain”, and now imply around a 75% chance that Britain stays in. If the answer to the country’s biggest political question for a generation is indeed “Remain”, it will be a triumph of youthful optimism over the tyranny of the old.

