Applications deferred

2016-06-16

FOR all the Euroscepticism that has swept across the continent in recent years, there is one region where majorities still long to join the European Union: the western Balkans. From Sarajevo to Skopje, governments all want in. Even Serbs, who resented European countries’ role in the wars of former Yugoslavia in the 1990s, now want to join their club: polls show a plurality would vote for accession, though support has declined in recent years.

Upgrade your inbox and get our Daily Dispatch and Editor's Picks.

But although the Balkans may be eager to join the EU, the converse is not necessarily true. The region has slipped “below the radar and is neglected”, worries Tanja Miscevic, Serbia’s chief accession negotiator. Brussels has no vision for the Balkans. And whatever the result of Britain’s Brexit referendum, the tensions it has unleashed may put any further EU enlargement on indefinite hold.

Most Balkan countries that want to join the club are doing well at fulfilling the criteria. Officials in Brussels list many advances made by Serbia, Montenegro, Kosovo, Bosnia and Albania. (Macedonia is going backwards.) The glass is “more than half full”, says an EU official. The union’s member states, however, are increasingly sceptical about admitting new members. Balkan governments were alarmed by Dutch voters’ rejection of an EU association agreement with Ukraine in April. What if their countries meet all of the EU’s arduous requirements, only to have accession scuppered by a referendum in one state?

Meanwhile, says Ms Miscevic, the EU has been losing its credibility in the region. Macedonia has been in a deep political crisis for more than a year; a deal negotiated by an EU mission did not stick, and an exasperated Germany is now sending its own envoy to sort out the mess. Kosovo’s government has tried to curb the powers of the EU’s police and justice mission in the country. In Serbia pro-government media have accused the EU of being behind anti-government protests. Aleksandar Vucic, the prime minister-designate, says Serbia aims to join the union, but relations with Brussels have been frosty.

The country which has made the most progress towards joining the EU is Montenegro. According to Daliborka Uljarevic, a civic activist, the EU integration process is the most powerful motor of reform in the region. But, she adds, while her country has assiduously changed its laws to meet EU requirements, it is only fitfully applying them: “When it comes to the rule of law, then we are failing.” This applies in varying degrees across the Balkans.

For all its shortcomings, the EU integration process has done much good. Some changes are diplomatic: Serbia’s relationship with Kosovo, which declared independence from it in 2008, has been transformed by EU-led talks, although many of the agreements negotiated have not yet been implemented. Others have to do with governance. In Montenegro one of the country’s most powerful figures was convicted last month of corruption in his hometown of Budva; several associates were arrested with him. They may simply be scapegoats intended to show the EU that the country is serious about tackling corruption. But it is also possible that real change is afoot.

What is clear is that the western Balkan states, an enclave surrounded by the EU, need friends. If the EU is too preoccupied by its own problems to accept them, Russia is ready to step in. Serbia is negotiating a trade agreement with the Russian-dominated Eurasian Economic Union. In a planned visit to Serbia, Dmitry Medvedev, the Russian prime minister, will discuss expanding a Russian-funded humanitarian emergency centre to include an abandoned airport in the country’s north.

Western officials fear that Russia’s real aim is less to help put out forest fires than to create a potential military airbase. If the EU’s Balkan enlargement process becomes nothing more than words, others will move in to fill the political and economic vacuum, to Europe’s disadvantage.

