Emmanuel Macron: Brexit would turn UK into tiny trading outpost

2016-06-18

Vote to leave the European Union would result in the ‘Guernseyfication’ of Britain, French economy minister warns

 in Paris




The French economy minister, 

 and is tipped as a possible French presidential contender, told 

In the interview days before the UK’s referendum on whether to stay or leave the EU, Macron was asked what status Britain would have after a Brexit. He said that within a week of a vote to leave, the European council would collectively send “a very firm message and timetable” on the consequences of 

“You’re either in or you’re out,. The day after an exit, there would be no more financial passport for British establishments. The European council should give the British an ultimatum on their intentions and the French president will be very clear in that respect. 

“If the UK wants a commercial access treaty to the European market, the British must contribute to the European budget like the Norwegians and the Swiss do. If London doesn’t want that, then it must be a total exit.”

Macron has previously said he felt the British referendum marked the end of an era for a bloc that had lost its political direction and needed to rethink and reorganise. 

He said the rest of the EU had a “double challenge” the day after any UK referendum result. First, it had to avoid the “contamination of Brexit” affecting other countries such as Denmark, the Netherlands, Poland or Hungary asking for their own special status. Then there had to be a new dynamic for an improved “positive project” for 

He said even if remain won, France would immediately launch initiatives. He said the 

Macron said: “To avoid the trap of Europe fragmenting on the economy, security and identity, we have to return to the original promises of the European project: peace, prosperity and freedom. We should have a real, adult, democratic debate about the Europe we want.”

Earlier, Macron told RTL radio that, although people should have a voice on the future of Europe, he felt the 23 June referendum was “dangerous” and that Britain had “taken the rest of the 

But he said the referendum would mark a new phase of the EU defining its political and social purpose. “It’s the end of an ultra-liberal Europe that has lost its political direction … The European project cannot only be a system of abolishing rules.” He said that, at the heart of the British debate, was a drive to correct the effect of ultra-liberal economic policies “that they [the British] pushed us into”.

Macron, 38, an outspoken former banker, regularly polls higher than the unpopular French president, 

In Le Monde, he condemned the murder of the British MP Jo Cox as a “crime against democratic debate”.

