Who will be applauding if Britain walks out on Europe?

2016-06-21

Letters




I wanted to ask you to please go and vote, and to vote for Britain to remain in the EU. Not because of 1% or 2% of GDP growth. Not because of the value of the pound. Not because Britain, like 

No, I ask you to vote “in” because I love Europe and the EU, and want Britain to be part of it. Europe is about openness, about meeting people easily, and living and working with them. I am German, and spent a term at a British boarding school as an exchange student. My wife is French, and our children were born in the Netherlands and Switzerland. Moving through 

Putting Britain’s interests first sounds like a reasonable enough idea. But what if the French go for “France d’abord”, Germans claim “Deutschland zuerst”? And what if these “us first” claims contradict one another, and we do not have an EU to help us work out our differences? We’ve been there before. And we do not want to be there again. Never.

Who would be applauding if Britain were to leave the EU? Putin would be laughing. Beijing would be gleeful. And all the other my-country-comes-first guys: Marine Le Pen, Strache of Austria, the ugly German AfD party, Farage. Imagining what Europe would look like gives me the creeps. So please, vote for Britain to stay in, help to make Europe better. With love,

 Franklin Medhurst DFC (

Brexit would take these rights away from those in my family who hold British passports. This would have included my late brother, who worked in the aerospace industry in 

 I will not be voting on Thursday, not because I don’t want to – I would dearly love to – but because I can’t. My postal voting papers have not arrived and it is now impossible for me to return them in time to be counted. I am a British citizen living in 

 I cannot vote in this EU referendum but I can write. The exchange of threats during the campaign has brought out the worst in this country: its insular, provincial and intolerant attitude.

I came to this country in October 2001, after I obtained (in a open and competitive process) a fellowship to carry out research at the University of Warwick. Less than a year later, I was offered a lectureship in applied mathematics at the University of Leeds. Back then, I believed that this country was special. It was tolerant and open to people like me.

I felt I was trusted and valued, because I could contribute to this country (with my teaching and my research), something that my own (Spain) had not offered me.

Now, I feel vulnerable and unwelcome. As silly as it may sound, I have second thoughts about speaking Spanish to my own children in public in case another intolerant person decides he or she wants us out. But 

It is a shame that this country has shown its true (and dark) colours. I live in the hope that there is a large fraction of voters able to see beyond the threats and the lacerating language of some speeches. If only we could rescue the jewel in the crown of this country – its tolerance towards those who might be from the continent or from overseas, but who bring their hopes and dreams of a better life.

 I’m just a simple man with no influence, but I would blame myself if I didn’t just do my little bit. I beg you to vote for staying in the EU.

The EU is more than financial matters and stupid rules from Brussels. It is a symbol of peace between our countries. British culture was always a great inspiration for me and I couldn’t imagine living without it. If you decide to leave, it wouldn’t change my attitude. But things can only get better together.

