How Brexit could damage our health

2016-06-21




uch of the EU debate is conducted at the level of insults and unsupported claims and assertions. But, if we care to look, there are many areas where it is not difficult to identify the effects of Brexit. 

European health insurance cards, which have for many years guaranteed emergency treatment for Britons wherever they are in the EU would of course disappear in case of 

Of course the 

The UK is a world centre for health and medical research. To a large extent this is the result of the substantial EU research budget. We receive substantially 

The freedom of movement which allows the best scientists in 

Public health security at present relies substantially on the EU. Surveillance of developing epidemics and the appearance of brand new infectious disease hazards is centralised in the 

Similarly, legislation on what is allowed to be included in food and how it is labelled is all of EU origin. The food industry complains loudly about being forced to comply with these safety measures. Could we really rely on any UK government to maintain these safety standards, in the face of the powerful lobbying of the food industry, without EU support?

When we think of one of the biggest challenges facing humanity today – climate change – it is the EU that leads the world in combating it. European agriculture is a major source of global warming gases, and the EU is seeking ways of reforming farming to solve the problem. Farmers are already beginning to protest loudly; the UK is in a far stronger position to fight this battle in cooperation with other European governments than alone.

Control of environmental standards is also an EU responsibility – 

The original EEC was founded to guarantee peace in Europe, where war had ravaged the continent for half a century. The EEC and its successor the EU have been very successful in this respect. Maintenance of peace is the perhaps the first public health priority above all others. We should not threaten this by beginning to break up the EU.

