Cameron: Brexiters stoking intolerance with immigration obsession

2016-06-21

 PM criticises narrow focus of Farage, Gove and Hilton and says remain vote would show rejection of insular view

 and 




 has accused leave campaigners of stoking intolerance and division with extreme warnings on immigration, and said Britain will be seen as a more “narrow, insular and inward-looking” country if it votes to leave the EU.

In an interview with the Guardian two days before the referendum, the prime minister said all sides of the leave campaign had “become very narrowly focused” on immigration and that the decision could carry consequences.

“I’ve always believed that we have to be able to discuss and to debate immigration. But I’ve always believed that this is an issue that needs careful handling,” he said, speaking in his Downing Street office on Tuesday before embarking on a final 24 hours of campaigning.

“We are talking to a country that has a lot of people who have fled persecution and contribute a massive amount to our country. It does need great care.”

Describing the UK as “arguably the most successful multi-ethnic, multi-faith, opportunity democracy anywhere on earth”, Cameron said a remain vote would represent a step forwards, sending “a very clear message that we’ve rejected this idea that Britain is narrow and insular and inward-looking”.

He hit back at leading leave campaigners by name, including his former adviser Steve Hilton, saying he had been wrong to 

“When [Hilton] left in 2012, net migration was falling. The figures were 244,000 in 2010 and by the autumn of 2012 it was down to 154,000, so it was falling towards that ambition,” Cameron said.

He also singled out 

“The motivation was just so obvious, that it was an attempt to divide and breed intolerance for political benefit, and it was the wrong approach.”

Asked about the tactics of Conservative colleagues in the Vote Leave campaign, such as Michael Gove and Boris Johnson, Cameron suggested they had switched their emphasis from the economy to concentrate on immigration. 

“I think their campaign has become very narrowly focused,” he said, criticising their decision to suggest that Turkey would join the EU, which he has said is a lie.

 “I obviously didn’t start the campaign making that argument,” he added.

Cameron said he hoped to be able to return to Brussels after a remain vote to push for more reform around freedom of movement, using the scale of support for 

“I think reform doesn’t end on 23 June. The voice of reform will be strengthened, because we will have had a referendum.”

Cameron’s efforts to persuade the public to vote to stay in the EU may be boosted by 

The boss of Aston Martin, however, has told employees that leaving the EU could make British exports more competitive.

Earlier in the day, as part of his final attempt to persuade the public to vote remain, Cameron addressed the nation from a podium in Downing Street. He said he wanted to speak directly to people of his generation and older, to persuade them to think of the “hopes and dreams” of their children and grandchildren.

Senior leave campaigners said the move betrayed nerves on the prime minister’s part, but the remain camp appeared less panicked than a week ago, apparently buoyed by a shift in the polls towards an in vote.

Stressing the economic arguments for remaining, Cameron suggested young people might be tempted to move abroad in search of work if people voted to leave, that they would “go to where the opportunities are”.

He also said a vote to stay in the EU would trigger an instant economic boost, a “remain dividend” from lifting the “Brexit cloud” of uncertainty. 

“I think there would be a great sense on Friday that wealth creators and job creators and businesses and individuals would feel, right, we know where we are, we’ve made a decision. Let’s get on with creating jobs, let’s keep moving the economy forward,” he said.

The value of sterling on the foreign exchanges jumped on Monday after opinion polls appeared to narrow over the weekend and traders judged that an exit was less likely. 

George Soros, whose attack on the pound helped push Britain out of the European exchange rate mechanism on what became known as Black Wednesday, 

Cameron said Britain was the hub for several industries in Europe, from the media to finance, which would be economically affected by an out vote. “I think there would be less opportunity, there would be less growth and excitement, less fizz about Britain’s creative and entrepreneurial place in the world.

“Clearly if you look at our creative industries, if you look at our hi-tech, if you look at all of our internet-based industries, we are succeeding on the basis of bringing people together and creating a real hub of technology here in Britain. I think that would be more difficult if you start cutting yourself off.”

He also said Brexit could reverse progress on equality. “There are still opportunities that are blocked, and glass ceilings we need to smash through, but I think it would be a step back from that because we would be reducing our opportunities.”

He acknowledged, however, that immigration posed a major challenge for his government. “It was a very big issue at the last election, it is a big issue every day we are in government and it will continue to be,” he said.

“My argument has been, you can’t ignore the fundamental questions people have about wanting to make sure globalisation benefits everyone, wanting to make sure that migration is properly managed.”

Out campaigners said Cameron could not be trusted on immigration. A Vote Leave spokesman said: “The prime minister has sought to paint those people who want to take back control of our democracy, economy and borders as little Englanders and Ukippers. It is a bit rich for him to be commenting on the tone of the debate.”

He said Cameron had repeatedly misled the public over the EU renegotiation and the ability to remove people from the UK who failed to secure work.

Nigel Farage said: “The 

“I think one of the biggest moments of this referendum campaign has been the revelation from the prime minister’s former right-hand man that David Cameron knew years ago that his tens of thousands net migration pledge was impossible inside the EU, yet refuses to admit it. 

“With David Cameron in charge, this country has seen record high net migration and he wants Turkey to join on top of that. We must make June 23 our Independence Day so that we can start controlling immigration.”

