EU referendum live: Khan accuses Boris Johnson of leading 'Project Hate' in BBC's Great Debate

2016-06-21

 and 







That’s all from me for tonight.

Thanks for the comments.

Updated





This is what Labour are saying about tonight’s debate. Here is an extract from the briefing the party has sent out.

Remain clearly won the debate tonight, making the case for why Britain is better off in. Better off in for jobs, rights at work, lower prices and our NHS.

 made the positive Labour case for remaining in the EU. It brings us jobs, growth and investment, protects British workers and consumers and helps keep us safe. Leaving would put that at risk and diminish Britain’s influence in the world.

In contrast, the leave campaign had no answers on the big issues facing the country.

Updated





Even Labour’s 

That Ruth Davidson had done her homework before the EU debate. 




has been polling people who watched the debate for the Times. Here are the results.

YouGov found that leave won the debate - although the same respondents are more likely to vote remain (marginally).

It also found that Boris Johnson was judged to have done best, followed by 

Worryingly for remain, YouGov also found the don’t knows breaking for leave.

Exc: YouGov Times debate jury results

Times / YouGov results:

Times / YouGov 

Times / YouGov BBC Debate

Updated





This is what political journalists and commentators are saying about the debate on Twitter.

No one seems to think either side “won” decisively, but 

From the New Statesman’s 

Sadiq and Ruth give Remain the punch it has lacked - my take on 

From the Guardian’s 

Ruth Davidson helped save Cameron in Scottish referendum in 2014 and may have done same with EU referendum. Passion finally found.

From the Spectator’s 

Thought tonight's debate was a score draw. At this stage of the campaign, that suits Remain

From the Independent’s

Ruth Davidson and Sadiq Khan the winners of tonight's BBC debate 

From the Sunday Times’s

Ruth Davidson having a stormer - not that that is news anymore 

From ITV’s

I'm hopeless judge of these things but 

Although Remain arguments same-old same-old, they sound new from new cast. Leave prob made error in fielding same cast as ITV debate

From the Sunday Times’s 

 very good, well supported by Frances O'Grady and Ruth Davidson.,Andrea Leadsom going down like a lead balloon.

From the Times’s 

Sigh... Ruth Davidson is so good. Surely a by-election can be arranged before long

I know plenty of people hate him, but Boris actually did very well there.

From the Sun’s

Tough to call who won 

From the Economist’s 

Great final statement from 

From Huffington Post’s 

Boris has done well tonight, Gisela too. But Sadiq and Ruth D have finally made voting Remain seem like a passionate choice 

Boris still by far the star of Leave. Remain underestimate him at their peril. Just imagine what Leave wdve looked like without him.

Boris has a corker of a payoff line "This Thursday could be our independence day!" 

From the Mail on Sunday’

Thought final speeches framed problem for Leave. Boris rallying cry will inspire 

From ITV’s

 A consensus appears to be developing that tonight may not resolve 

From Channel 4 News’s 

Funny seeing who gets the praise. Ruth Davidson and Sadiq Khan vying for Remain award. Boris undisputed champion of Leave. 

Overall 

From the Daily Mail’s 

Beeb Wembley stunt went unexpectedly well for Leavers, I'd say. But what a firing squad of shouty soundbites. Reithian values on acid.

From the Sunday Times’s

This would have been more bearable if anyone saying "take back control" was given an immediate electric shock to the genitals

The fact that Remain don't have a pithy phrase like "take back control" is a massive problem for them

If nothing else has happened I this campaign, 

From the BBC’s

Ruth Davidson making this a real blue-on-blue fest. Clearly loathes Boris and says Andrea Leadsom lying (as opposed to wrong).

From the BBC’s 

Seems like barring a late goal, the 

From Sky’s

It felt in earlier debates that 

From LBC’s 

My ranking from the debate tonight...




, the former Labour peer and newly appointed government enterprise tsar, is getting criticised for posting this on Twitter.

I find it strange that Gisela Gschaider a 1974 immigrant from Germany is on the brexit panel telling us British what we should do .

Updated





This is from the Mail’s

Sadiq Khan's team confirm he hasn't eaten or drank for 19 hours (Ramadan). I would love to watch Boris debate under the same circumstances!




And this is from the Sun’s 

William Hill twice shortened the odds on 




According to the Sun’s 

Pretty massive impromptu dust up ongoing now in 

Updated





And here is the

The in campaign had nothing positive to contribute tonight – just like they’ve failed to make a positive contribution during the whole campaign. They’ve lost the economic argument, they don’t want to spend the £350m we send to Brussels every week on our priorities, and can’t explain how we can ever control immigration from inside the EU. They couldn’t even be honest about how many laws in this country come from Brussels. The public will have a choice on Thursday: they can choose project fear and vote in or they can chose project hope and take back control of their money and their borders. A Vote to Leave on Thursday is a vote for democracy.

(So Vote Leave have not entirely give up on the £350m. See

Updated





Here is the 

Tonight the leave campaign blew their last chance to show they have a plan for Britain’s future:

· The leave campaign have no plan for the future of our economy, because they couldn’t guarantee jobs, said it would take “ten years” to do a new trade deal with the EU, and couldn’t name a single country who would do a trade deal with the UK outside the EU.

· The leave campaign have no plan for the future of immigration, because they were unable to say they would reduce numbers.

· The leave campaign have no plan for our national security, as 

Updated





The only really reliable way to assess who has “won” a debate is to find a representative panel and poll them, but even then people are likely to side with the politicians they supported before it started, and so really you need to find a panel of neutrals. And if a panel of neutrals had watched that? Most likely, they would have ended up as confused as ever.

What was striking, though, was how leave has managed to get to the end of the campaign, with expert economic opinion almost unanimous in saying Brexit would harm the economy and no one having the first idea what post-Brexit trading relationships would look like, and this not being a fatal handicap in a debate of this kind. The format helped tonight, because the participants were not subjected to forensic questioning, but somehow leave have managed to brush aside all the doubts with breezy optimism. It is not a feat that many people could pull off, but 

Remain were underpowered on the economy, and struggling on immigration, but if debates of this kind are judged by how people see them on the TV news - and for most people that is how they are judged - then they have probably done better than my early snap summaries imply. Sadiq Khan and 

One final point: did you notice that there was almost no mention of the £350m that Vote Leave claim we send to the EU every week? That figure has been widely denounced as untrue, but for weeks Vote Leave defended it. Perhaps it has finally become discredited? Or perhaps it has been grounded because its task is done?

Updated


