Remain in EU, say former UK security and intelligence chiefs

2016-06-20




Economists can argue forever – or neverendum, as the saying goes now. What is extraordinary is the breadth and depth of the arguments over the pros and cons of EU membership - even entering the realm of spooks. 

Former security and intelligence chiefs (who make it clear they are speaking for serving officers) are warning that leaving the EU would hinder their work protecting Britain. It is as if Brexiteers, including some senior ministers, are dismissing offhand warnings from 

“I do know”, said Nigel Inkster, a former director of 

In the event of 

He acknowledged that European countries would share vital intelligence in the event of a major security threat. However, Inkster warned: “You cannot predict which of the allies have a crucial [piece of information]”.

There are some in Brussels who want the EU to develop a common intelligence-gathering service, as well as a “European Army” (see below). They will not happen. Security and intelligence-gathering is the jealously-guarded preserve of national governments. Pooling of information - yes. Abandoning national control - no.

What the EU can provide is what Inkster called “a backcloth of intelligence and security functions”.

Sir David Omand, Whitehall’s former chief security and intelligence coordinator, pointed out that after the terrorist attacks in Paris in November, the British government had agreed actually to step up cooperation in the EU by signing up to the 

Inkster was speaking at the launch of

He also warned that Brexit would “exacerbate existing faultlines” in Northern Ireland.

, chair of the IISS and board member of respected French and German thinktanks, referring to a 

And the EU would become more dysfunctional providing Moscow with an opportunity to exploit for its own ends.

The former head of MI5, Lady Manningham-Buller, 

The former head of MI6, Sir John Sawers, 

(Scarlett’s predecessor, Sir Richard Dearlove, head of MI6 in the run up to the 2003 invasion of Iraq, 

The former chief of defence staff, Lord Guthrie, 

The EU’s attempts to develop even a most general “European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP) has been in the doldrums for years, as Heisbourg pointed out.

Guthrie warned of the danger of “duplication” with the EU trying to rival Nato. It could never do that. And there is duplication now with European countries wasting money building competing models of tanks, aircraft, armoured cars, ships.

Duplication is contributing to the kind of inefficient European armed forces that the US - and both Obama and Trump - complain about.

Nato commanders, as well as the US president, urge Britain to stay in the EU. A message that, curiously, has not convinced two British defence ministers 

