Britain would be 'less attractive' for my cash after Brexit, world's richest man Bill Gates warns after spending $1BILLION here

2016-6-17

Bill Gates has warned Britain would be a 'significantly less attractive' place to do business if voters back Brexit next week.

The world's richest man, who has ploughed a billion dollars into Britain for research and established major Microsoft lab in Cambridge, said quitting the EU would undermine the UK's 'unique assets'. 

Mr Gates said the referendum was a 'ultimately a matter for the British people' but advised Britain was 'stronger, more prosperous and more influential' inside the EU.

The co-founder of Microsoft is one of the world's biggest philanthropic investors, spending chunks of his fortune on research into infectious disease.

Bill Gates, the world's richest man, has warned a Brexit vote next week would make investing in Britain 'significantly less attractive' 

In a letter to The Times, Mr Gates said: 'While ultimately a matter for the British people to decide, it is clear to me that if Britain chooses to be outside of Europe, it will be a significantly less attractive place to do business and to invest.

'It will be harder to find and recruit the best talent from across the Continent; talent which, in turn, creates jobs for people in the UK.

'And, it would be harder to raise the investment needed for public goods such as new medicines and affordable clean energy solutions, for which we need the scale of collaboration, knowledge sharing, and financial backing that the combined strength of the EU provides.'

Mr Gates said Britain today had a 'strong influence' at the negotiating table as the world wrestled with global challenges.

And he added: 'Beating future epidemics and finding solutions to climate change will require more collaboration, not less.'

Mr Gates has been a close ally of the Government and last year filmed a video for the Conservative Party conference.

He thanked the Tory leadership for its commitment to spending 0.7 per cent national income on foreign aid, despite the controversy over the pledge on the Tory benches.

In January, Chancellor George Osborne appeared alongside Mr Gates to announce British taxpayers would contribute most of a £3billion joint project to wipe out Malaria within decades.

Mr Gates appeared with George Osborne in January to announce investment in a project to eliminate malaria 













