Northern Ireland’s greatest fear from a Brexit is the return to conflict

2016-06-21




orthern Ireland has had more than its fair share of problems over the years but a Brexit could be its toughest challenge to date. As polls suggest that leave and remain are neck and neck, the possibility of a post-Brexit 

Last week David Cameron confirmed that 

Almost 20 years have passed since the Good Friday Agreement, and huge progress has been made in that time. Since our last referendum in 1998, Northern Ireland has enjoyed relative peace, and the province has flourished. The tourist industry 

Terrorism still exists across the province, and the paramilitaries are waiting to relaunch their bitter campaigns

The majority of this growth has been courtesy of the EU itself. Northern Ireland received almost £2.5bn in the last EU funding round, and a further £2bn is promised before 2020. The EU has also helped to create a number of cross-border programmes such as Intertrade, Peace and Tourism Ireland, all of which have been hugely successful in bringing together communities both north and south of the border. Today, Northern Ireland is more integrated than it has ever been – even if sectarian attacks and marching season riots haven’t been eliminated completely.

Yet given the emphasis on immigration during the referendum debates, border controls are likely to become a priority in the event of a 

To install physical checkpoints along the border would instantly undermine a hard-won peace, and the psychological impact alone would be catastrophic. A return of those barricaded towers and armed checkpoints will stir up emotional memories for many Northern Irish people who witnessed years of violence in border towns such as Newry, Omagh and Derry, and there is a very real fear that they may lead to a resurgence of dissident activity.

Let’s not be naive – terrorism still exists across the province, and the paramilitaries are just waiting for an excuse to relaunch their bitter campaigns. Just last month, Theresa May raised the threat level from Northern Ireland to Great Britain from 

Bizarrely, the DUP – Northern Ireland’s leading political party – has been aggressively campaigning for a leave vote, with first minister Arlene Foster 

For residents of Northern Ireland, the possibility of a return to conflict overshadows every other possible benefit or drawback of a Brexit. This vote could change everything, and the Northern Irish people will ultimately have very little say in the result.

With just over a million people eligible to vote, Northern Irish votes are unlikely to make much of a difference to the overall result. On Thursday, the future of Northern Ireland will essentially be decided by people who don’t live there. Great Britain may be able to weather a Brexit, but Northern Ireland simply cannot.

