The Bregretters! How some voters who backed Leave vote now claim they want to STAY in the EU . . . 'I didn't think my vote would count'

2016-6-24

Some of the Brexit supporters who chose to quit the EU regret their decision because they were fed 'lies' by the Leave campaign - and didn't think their vote would count.

Several Leave voters today revealed their unease over the referendum result as David Cameron dramatically stepped down and the markets grappled with the  financial uncertainty.

One woman said she was 'disappointed' by the outcome and that, if she had the chance again, she would vote to remain in the EU instead.

One woman, identified only as Mandy (pictured), said she was 'disappointed' by the outcome and that, if she had the chance again, she would vote to remain in the EU instead

Speaking at Manchester Airport, the woman, identified only as Mandy, said the 'reality' had now hit home.

She added that she had made the original decision to the 'pressure of being told' how to vote by two competing sides.

She told ITV: 'I was really disappointed about the votes even though I voted to leave. This morning I woke up and the reality did actually hit me.

'If I had the opportunity to vote again, it would be to stay.' 

Another Leave voter also said he was 'shocked' - and that he had only opted for Brexit because he didn't think his vote would  matter.

In a segment during the BBC's rolling coverage of events, the man, introduced as Adam, said: 'I'm a bit shocked to be honest. I didn't think that was going to happen.

'I didn't think my vote was going to matter too much because I thought we were just going to remain.'

Another Leave voter, known as Adam, also said he was 'shocked' - and that he had only opted for Brexit because he didn't think his vote wouldn't matter

He added: 'The David Cameron resignation has blown me away to be honest and the period of uncertainty that we're going through is going to be magnified now. So yeah, I'm quite worried.'

Another Brexiteer called Hazel said she was 'not entirely convinced' at the outcome, despite having voted to leave the EU.

She said: 'I was led to believe that part of the money we pay to be in Europe was going to go on the NHS. But, this morning, it's lies.

'Why lie about something and get the vote and say "well that's not happening, this isn't happening anymore?". I am now in turmoil over it.' 

 

Other Leave voters have also shared their regret on Twitter, with one saying 'I really regret my vote now'

She added: 'I now understand a little bit more about it than I what I did in the first place.' 



Other Leave voters have also shared their regret on Twitter. 

One wrote: 'I personally voted leave believing these lies and I regret it more than anything, I feel genuinely robbed of my vote.'

Another said: 'I really regret my vote now.'

The Leave campaign stacked up 52 per cent of the votes - despite massive support for Remain in Scotland and major cities including London. 

The result shocked the nation and led to a political earthquake, in which David Cameron stepped down as Prime Minister and a vote of no confidence was passed on Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn.  



 

 

