EU bureaucrats want your tea and toast. Arm yourself with a Dyson

2016-06-21

The Brexit war cry has been bellowed from a flimsy stage set of Britishness. Leaving the EU won’t miraculously transport us back to 1950s domesticity

Contact author




hey’re coming for our kettles and they’ve got their eyes on our toasters. Those faceless EU bureaucrats will stop at nothing to see our lawnmowers reined in and our hairdryers tamed, our milk bottles outlawed and our Sunday roasts served undercooked. 

At the Hunter-welly-wearing core of the 

When it comes to the ballot box, where the beloved English tradition of the blunt pencil and the rickety foldaway booth awaits in a quaintly tea-stained village hall, the arguments will no longer be about economics or immigration, but 

The Brexit rallying call has become a war cry bellowed from a flimsy stage set of Britishness, by an army whose primary weapon is a poisonous cocktail of nostalgia and fear. And in a surreal turn of events, domestic appliances have found themselves on the frontline of the scaremongering campaign. The twin British traditions of tea and toast are now in the EU’s firing line, we are told, with sinister plans afoot to castrate our kettles and turn down our toasters in a bid to save the environment.

“My toaster takes four attempts before bread goes brown,” 

Coburn’s outpouring came in response to the European Commission’s 

The extension of the Ecodesign programme to other appliances 

When did facts ever get in the way of a Eurosceptic headline?

Twenty-five years of Europhobic rumours, half-truths and lies have been lovingly documented on the 

“Now Brussels targets your lawnmower,” screamed one Mail headline in 2014. The truth behind the story was the introduction of new measures to cut toxic emissions from petrol engines, bringing other machines into line with regulations imposed on car engines years ago. “EU allows poisonous mower chemicals to kill our children,” might have been the headline if Brussels hadn’t acted sooner.

Other topics range from binge-drinking to barstaff’s cleavage and barristers’ wigs, those cherished staples of British culture allegedly threatened by EU directives.

 raged the Sun in 2005, in response to EU rules that require bosses to assess the risk of skin and retina damage for employees who are forced to work in the sun all day. The same paper railed against European Commission research into 

The Euromyths site reads like a Brexit shopping list, running the gamut from double-decker buses to 

It’s not just our image, apparently, but the taste, sound and smell of Britishness that is threatened, too. Those fat cats are intent on attacking all our senses, with measures that will silence our canons and 

None of the above, if you read the facts behind the outrage, is true. But when did facts ever get in the way of a Eurosceptic headline?

It is a pernicious narrative of nostalgia, ongoing since the very foundation of the European Union, and one that has reached a frothy boil of sentimental nationalism. Leaving the EU won’t miraculously transport us back to the 1950s, nor will it make our toast any browner or our kettles heat faster. It will leave us very much alone, hemmed in by higher 

