EU referendum: ‘This is now a battle for an idea of Britain’

2016-06-19

The sentiments over the EU referendum are very real, dividing the country into two hostile camps




urope is an idea. It’s better than that – it’s a noble idea. The many countries of a small continent club together, sharing common values and common interests, to solve problems, break down barriers and live better than they would and could otherwise. The immediate impetus in the 1950s was the avoidance of European conflict; today, the EU’s anti-fascist, anti-war roots still count but more important is the European Union’s capacity to offer each country more heft in political, economic and social affairs that it would have by itself.

Thus, British workers have more rights than they otherwise would. There are more good jobs in our factories than there otherwise would be – and more in the City of London, too. New companies starting up have the whole of the European single market at their feet. Beaches are cleaner, tourist flights cheaper and mobile phone charges lower. Farmers’ incomes are higher and more predictable. Fish stocks in the North Sea are rising. Scientists drive forward frontier science more efficiently. We can monitor and catch potential terrorists more easily.

When multinationals abuse their power, they can be challenged more effectively. Europe can deal with the US and China on level terms and make a volatile, uncertain global political environment just that bit safer. But, best of all, we are part of a European club that is trying to make our world better.

Certainly, each country gives up some sovereignty, just as any members of any club agree to rules. Of course there is a secretariat – a small civil service on the same scale as Birmingham’s – to drive the club forward. But it is run by elected politicians from members of the club and held accountable to representatives elected to the European parliament. It is open to scrutiny by the media and judicial arrangements of each member country.

It is work in progress, but this is a well-intentioned, democratic, accountable structure dedicated to improving the lot of ordinary Europeans – and it does surprisingly well.

Yet millions of British, especially the less well-off left behind in cities and towns all round the country, are so unimpressed they want to leave. These are the arguments of the elite, they say. Too many English working-class lives in 2016 are tough, and if Europe is making things better it is hardly obvious to them. There are myriad bad jobs on poor wages that go nowhere. Housing is lousy in wasted urban spaces that nobody cares to make look pleasing. Public services are deteriorating, the roads are crowded and buses and trains so expensive they can hardly be afforded. The rich feather their nests, but nobody cares about the numbers of people, reeling from the impact of mass immigration that makes everything worse still. Remainers can all get lost.

Yoked in an uneasy coalition with communities that share these views are the greying Conservatives in the suburbs and shires, yearning for the lost certainties of the pre-EU Britain they grew up in 40 or 50 years ago. They inherit the mindset of empire and Britain in 1940: British identity is about the power to go it alone. The inconsistencies of Thatcherism – the apostle of surrender to the anonymity of market forces while projecting the power of the British state – are their inconsistencies too. They simultaneously want more market forces – and control. Give the country’s economic and political leadership a kick in the teeth. The bureaucratic, sinister, anti-democratic EU is part of the problem, not the solution.

It is breathtakingly wrong, fanned by a rightwing press whose fanatical anti-EU zealotry has climbed new heights of blind prejudice.

But the sentiments are very real, dividing the country into two mutually uncomprehending and very hostile camps. To be a Remain campaigner in Leave territory is to risk incurring stunning personal abuse and invective.

The 

Brexit would not herald a new dawn. As 

The millions of working-class voters thinking of voting 

Moreover, the values that will make our lives better are mutuality and generosity – not telling others to go home and turning our backs on the noble if derided EU. To leave is to indulge the worst side of our natures, to believe fantasies about what constitutes democracy and to chase an economic chimera. To remain is a double win – to be part of something good and get richer in the process. Think before you vote.

