Ukip takes poetic licence as Nigel Farage breaks into a sweat

2016-06-22

Ukip’s final campaign speech was marked with a poem of linguistic audacity and more fear, conspiracy and nostalgia

Contact author




here was only one way for Steven Woolfe, the 

Woolfe’s voice choked with emotion; the rest of us merely choked, wondering why it was that Kipling had never had the linguistic audacity to internally rhyme “fell” with “fell”, to insert a homophone for sought that suggested the power to exclude and to use the absence of punctuation as a metaphor for having no control over our borders.

While Woolfe wiped aside a tear, a short film of the Battle of Britain, the 

As the lights came on, 

But Nigel wasn’t going to go without a fight. Not so much for a vote to leave as for the protection of his own legacy. Nigel was the one who had changed the political landscape, not some Boris-come-lately. He was the one who had come up with the Australian points-style immigration system; he was the one who had noticed there were German cars on our roads; he was the first one to “believe in Britain”, he was the one who had directed Independence Day.

Me, me, me, me, me. Nigel moved on to other familiar tropes. He waved his EU passport. Could there be anything more symbolic of how the British people have been crushed by the EU superstate and its army that doesn’t exist but definitely will on Friday because Nigel has secret knowledge that it is already being assembled in Turkey. How dare the EU grant British citizens freedom of movement within 27 other countries! How very dare they!

Yes, he was a bit apologetic for the timing of his 

It was all same old, same old. Fear, conspiracy and nostalgia. Nigel has been saying stuff like this for years and in that time the island in which he lives has been getting smaller and smaller. No wonder he feels so threatened. He’d have been even more paranoid if he’d noticed someone from the leave campaign had tried to lock him in. It’s never that easy to present yourself as the inclusive option when you’ve got Nigel on your side.

“It’s getting very sweaty in here,” said Nigel, as he dabbed his brow during a TV interview. “Who booked this basement?” No one was brave enough to tell him it had been Boris.

