When I was a footballer, Europe became my home country

2016-06-16

My career took in my native Denmark, the Netherlands, England, Germany and Spain. But I never understood English supporters’ indifference to the rest of the continent




As a young boy in a remote area of 

So my girlfriend and I made an agreement. Football was to be our opportunity to see Europe and experience different cultures. After two years with 

The football fan on the street knew everything there was to know about the team’s current results, as well as their performances going back 10 years. He knew everything about Everton’s back four, even though he supported 

I always took the opinions of these fans seriously, even though they could be harsh and without justification. Both because they knew their football and because they appreciated their players. When I 

The British attitude towards continental football also said a great deal about the people. In short they were totally indifferent towards football and countries abroad. They did not know the difference between 

But I was fine with it. I just thought it was the way British football culture had evolved. This approach was just an expression of a great love for your own way of during things.

I also experienced other cultures, German and Spanish, and what football meant to them. In Germany, where I spent a year with Stuttgart, everything was incredibly decent, organised and precise.

Spain still intrigues me. I played for Atlético Madrid in 2005 and did not understand how on the surface people could be so happy, seemingly unworried, despite high unemployment rates and other economic difficulties for the country, and at the same time feel such a great passion for their football club. It was like those two things did not correlate.

I ended my career in the Danish capital. We won championships and established perhaps the greatest Danish club team ever, in 2010/2011, when we made it to the last 16 of the Champions League, a feat no other Danish team has ever managed.

Even though Copenhagen was very different from Thy, where I had grown up, Denmark was my safe harbour, as I returned for my retirement. But I – and many others like me – had made 

