The writings of Gove and Boris reveal a chilling double act

2016-06-21

If Brexit happens, the chances of them running the country will increase. Do their books contain any clues about what they might do?




f Britain votes to leave the European Union on Thursday, the chances of Boris Johnson and Michael Gove running the country will increase. In such a nightmare scenario, we need to know what the two leading Brexiteers stand for and what they are likely to do to us if, as is not impossible, a discredited David Cameron is toppled. To find out how they would change Britain, I have been reading their books – everything from Johnson’s 

There is an immediate problem in trying to work out what they stand for: 

Johnson is to British politics what the Red Queen was to Through The Looking-Glass: a virtuoso of inconsistency. For instance, if you read The Perils of the Pushy Parents, his debut book of poetry from 2007 (and I strongly urge that you don’t), you’ll find the following argument (if that isn’t too strong a word):

“Loving parents, learn from me.

There is lots more of this prosodically challenged guff. But that’s not the point. The point is that a few months before this poem was published, Johnson argued the opposite. He posted a rant against video games on his website: “Summon up all your strength, all your courage. Steel yourself for the screams and yank out that plug. And if they still kick up a fuss, then get out the sledgehammer and strike a blow for literacy.” Like the Red Queen, Johnson is capable of believing as many as six impossible things before breakfast. He once said of the former leader of the Labour party: “He is a mixture of Harry Houdini and a greased piglet. He is barely human in his elusiveness. Nailing Blair is like trying to pin jelly to a wall.” Blair might have replied: “Pot, kettle.”

Gove, by contrast, is utterly consistent, immovable granite to Johnsonian jelly. The ideas that Gove developed in Celsius 7/7, written shortly after the 7 July 2005 bombings in London, have guided many of his policies as a government minister.

For instance, in 2014, as David Cameron’s education secretary, Gove appointed Peter Clarke, former national head of counter-terrorism, to investigate the alleged Islamisation of Birmingham schools and rumours about children being tutored in extremism. Eyebrows were raised: why not an education professional, official or judge to run the inquiry? Reading Celsius 7/7 helps us understand why.

In that book, Gove effectively posed as a latter-day Churchill, indicting Britain for its policy of appeasement. “Nowhere has moral clarity been more lacking in British state policy over the last 10 to 15 years,” Gove wrote, “than in our approach to the Islamist threat.” Islamists were infiltrating education in the same way the Trotskyist entryists of Militant had taken over parts of the Labour party in the 1980s, he suggested.

Celsius 7/7 starts with a chilling image, that of 

Like Khan, Gove thought he was at war. Like George W Bush, he saw the world in Manichean terms. Like political scientist Samuel P Huntington, author of 

He had, for instance, a notorious argument with home secretary Theresa May. She wanted a narrow focus on individuals posing a security threat, he told former colleagues at the Times, while Gove wanted to take on ideas 

In Celsius 7/7, he developed another image. Chapter 8 was entitled The Trojan Horse and its suggestion was that the enemies of British values were already subverting democracy from within. Strikingly, in 2014, a leaked letter was published, alleged to be from Birmingham Islamists, ostensibly detailing 

One of Gove’s responses to the Trojan horse scandal in Birmingham was his announcement, in 2014, that in the future all of England’s 20,000 primary and secondary schools would have 

In 2006, Gove’s book was denounced by critics such as 

In 2014, the application of that book’s ideas to British politics was also attacked. Former Conservative minister Crispin Blunt 

After reading Gove’s Manichean philippic, Johnson’s writings are a jaunty relief, particularly when he goes off-message. In his 2006 book 

So what made Boris call for Turks to be admitted to the EU? He saw the Turkish people, not so much as a gun-toting, fast-breeding crime wave poised to break over the white cliffs of Dover, but as venerable and much-loved denizens of the cradle of civilisation. He called for Turkey to be admitted, “not just on grounds of religious tolerance, but also because Turkey, after all, was where the [Roman] empire survived for another 1,000 years until 1453. It would be good to bring the Turks in, and reunite the two halves of the Roman empire.”

Perhaps there was another reason for Johnson’s (if this isn’t too strong a word) policy proposal – his ancestry. As he wrote in a 2006 volume of collected journalism, 

Romantic, conservative, unwise, reckless – add to that description “inconsistent” and you have Boris’s political philosophy. What does Boris stand for? Nuclear power. Why? “It is not just that nuclear energy is environmentally friendly in itself … It also offers the hope that we can restore British activity and prestige in the physical sciences, not just as an end in itself, but because if we have to rely endlessly on the Russians for our gas, and on the Arabs for our oil, then no nukes will be bad nukes,” (Have I Got Views for You, p85).

And then there was his call for the re-Britannification of Britain. By which he meant that we had a lot to learn from the US. “In the wake of [Enoch] Powell’s racist foray, no one had the guts to talk about Britishness, or whether it was a good thing to insist – as the Americans do so successfully – on the basic loyalty of immigrants to the country of immigration.” Like Gove, Johnson had Muslims in his cross-hairs: “If that means the end of spouting hate in mosques, and treating women as second-class citizens, then so be it. We need to acculturate the second–generation Muslim communities to our way of life, and end the obvious alienation they feel,” (Have I Got Views for You, p139). He didn’t explain how.

He also expressed strong, if contrary, views on racism. “When I shamble around the park in my running gear late at night, and I come across that bunch of black kids, shrieking in the spooky corner by the disused gents, I would love to pretend that I don’t turn a hair,” (Have I Got Views for You, p126). Do such sentiments make him a racist? By no means, Johnson argued. “In fact, I like to think my instincts, in this respect, are as blameless as those of the average Guardian reader; and the thing is I am guilty nonetheless, not of racism but of spasms of incorrectitude, soon over, soon regretted.” What fellow Tory Enoch Powell got wrong when he predicted foaming rivers of blood as Britain collapsed into racist rioting, Johnson argued, was to underestimate British tolerance.

The corollary? “[P]rovided we have a reasonable legal framework for minimising the problem – like the infrastructure to remove sewage – we could probably achieve the same results, if not better, if we axed large chunks of the anti-racism industry, stopped taxing people with the threat of legal action, and left a bit more of the struggle against racism to tolerance and common sense.” Again, how that would work was left obscure.

Nonetheless, rolling back the frontiers of the state thus is classic Boris. “The trick of the next few years,” Johnson wrote in 2005, “will be to show that you can have compassionate politics that are for the benefit of business and enterprise, and that you can gradually bear down on taxation and spending in a way that is good for everyone.” That trick, as you may have noticed a decade on, has not really been pulled off by David Cameron. Perhaps Johnson could succeed where our current prime minister and his chancellor have failed? Stop looking at me sceptically.

The model for the minimal state Johnson admires comes from his study of the Roman empire. “We would surely want the laissez-faire government of the high empire, in which the economy grew and people prospered with nominal bureaucracy and regulation,” he wrote in The Dream of Rome. Yes, there was slavery, but otherwise, if only the European Union had been more like the Roman empire, Johnson would no doubt have been sharing a remain platform with Cameron rather than trying to inflict on the prime minister his biggest humiliation since revelations about 

Near the end of The Dream of Rome, the Eton-educated Latinist argued: “It would be good to recapture that enormous public-spirited creative energy of the Romans, to say nothing of the efficiency that allowed them to rule an empire of 80 million with 150 officials.”

But we latter-day Europeans cannot hope to emulate imperial Rome. Why not? To understand why the European Union can never repeat its glories, I read chapter 20 of 

If only, Johnson suggests, Churchill had been prime minister in 1950, Britain would have become a leading member of the European Coal and Steel Community and thus been in the driving seat. That, Johnson argued, was what Churchill, as leader of the opposition sought, but shortsighted socialists pooh-poohed. Had they not, then, Britain might have helped create a European Union fit for purpose – one that Boris Johnson, at least, would not have campaigned for us to leave.

If Johnson’s writings are worth reading, it is not for his policy proposals, any of which he could renege upon before breakfast, but for such intriguing “what ifs” – the counterfactual history of Britain.

For all that Johnson eulogises Churchill, he does not see his clay as from the same mould as his hero’s. While The Churchill Factor is blurbed as “essential reading for those who want to know what makes a great leader”, Johnson admits that “as a politician I am not worthy to loose the latchet of his shoes”. A latchet, apparently, is a narrow thong for fastening a sandal. Did Churchill ever wear sandals? Frankly I don’t know. What I do know, from reading these books, is that it is not great men who are leading us to 

