Remainers, your country needs you. Spread the word, and make a difference

2016-06-18

The EU referendum is the most important vote in Britain for 40 years. As it approaches, let’s re-embrace democracy as a game in which we are all players

Contact author




e have just six days to keep Britain in the 

So if you live in Britain, and want us to remain, please talk to everyone you know. Reach out to those you think may be undecided or veering towards leave. Send that email; make the telephone call to your aunt or grandad. Ensure the postal votes go off in time. Volunteer via the 

And if you don’t live in Britain, like most of the Guardian’s online readers, how about messaging, emailing or calling 10 of your British friends?

I’m not going to rehearse again all the arguments for why the fate of two unions, the British and the European, will hang on the result – not to mention the economic dangers. But something else is also at stake: whether democracy can prevail over manipulation, common sense over hysteria, facts over lies.

Several times in recent months I have heard distinguished elderly gents, some of them unelected lords, murmuring in well-carpeted rooms that of course this referendum business is the root of the trouble: we have representative democracy, and it’s really a terrible idea to ask the people directly.

Leaving aside the obvious question of how exactly the House of Lords embodies representative democracy, I can see that, back in the day, this was a respectable constitutional argument. But as the constitutional expert 

That said, the scale of mendacity and manipulation in this referendum campaign has been breathtaking. We always knew we would be up against a predominantly Eurosceptic press. A 

Meanwhile, Boris Johnson’s battle bus has travelled the country with what is literally 

If you have ever wondered how the truth would get buried in Britain, this homeland of sceptical empiricism, here’s your answer: in Britain the facts get trashed in the name of Facts.

The BBC has become somewhat more robust since I last wrote about its referendum broadcasting, but I doubt that its cautious coverage begins to compensate for these baroque excesses. The vigorous cross-questioning of politicians by members of the audience on 

This very morning I heard someone conclude a report by saying that next Thursday’s vote will decide the fate not just of Britain but of David Cameron (glad that syntax got the priorities right). We can’t say loudly enough that this is not about them: it’s about us – about the future of our families, our country, our continent.

That’s why we need to reclaim democracy not as a spectator sport but as a game in which we are all players, not distorted by the spinning machines of what the Russians call “political technology” but face to face, on the streets, in the shops, in the pubs and our own homes. Real people debating with real people: democracy as practised when it was first invented in ancient Athens, in the assembly, the marketplace and the olive grove.

We can’t always be doing this, but this week, of all weeks, we should. Like 

