Mario Draghi and Janet Yellen poised for EU referendum fallout

2016-06-21

Central bankers from ECB and US Federal Reserve warn they are on high alert over outcome of vote, which still appears too close to call

 Economics editor




The two most powerful central bankers have warned that they are on high alert for financial and economic fallout from the EU referendum, amid signs that the result of Thursday’s vote still hangs in the balance.

On a day that saw Monday’s big rises in shares and the pound halted by polls showing the race too close to call, Mario Draghi, the president of the 

Draghi said: “We will closely monitor the evolution of the outlook for price stability. We stand ready to act by using all the instruments available within our mandate, if necessary, to achieve our objective. In particular, the ECB is ready for all contingencies following the UK’s 

Janet Yellen, the chair of the US Federal Reserve, 

“One development that could shift investor sentiment is the upcoming referendum in the United Kingdom. A UK vote to exit the 

As the referendum campaign reached its closing stages, the FTSE 100 marked time – closing 23 points higher at 6,227. The pound reached its highest level against the dollar since January during early trading on the foreign exchanges, but later slipped back to close slightly lower at just under $1.47.

George Soros, the speculator who drove Britain out of the exchange rate mechanism, has warned 

But other international economists backed Soros’s view that there would be serious market turmoil in the event of a vote to leave.

Larry Summers, the former US Treasury secretary, wrote in a 

He added that despite attempts to improve supervision of the financial system since the near-meltdown prompted by the Lehman Brothers collapse in September 2008, it was impossible to say how the system would respond to a 

“A return of systemic risk as large losses lead to cascading liquidations cannot be ruled out. At a time when central banks have far less ammunition than they did in 2008, the consequences could be grave,” he said. 

Nouriel Roubini, the economist nicknamed Dr Doom after accurately predicting the 2008 crisis, supported David Cameron’s view that Brexit would leave Britons worse off.

“Brexit could stall the UK economy and tip it into a recession as the shock to business and consumer confidence could be severe,” said Roubini, who teaches at New York University’s Stern school of business. 

While giving evidence to the European parliament, Draghi said: “We monitor all economic, political and legal developments so we can assess and manage the ensuing risks. We have existing swap lines with other central banks. The agreements are there, we want to make sure they are useable, active and adequate.

“The event will have short and long-term effects. It is hard to say what sort of action we would take in each contingency.”

But 

He added that the message was: “Vote remain and nobody gets hurt.” 

