British technology industry reacts in SHOCK to Brexit vote - but remains stoical about sector's future

2016-06-24

A collective cry of anguish went up from the technology community this morning, following the news that Britain has voted to leave the European Union.

As one of the UK's fastest growing industries - growing 32% faster than the rest of the UK’s economy - the technology sector is made up of lots of early-stage companies, which rely heavily on EU grants to survive.

Over the past five years, the European Investment Bank has invested over €29 billion (£23 billion) in the British economy. Only days ago, it agreed to lend £100 million to small and medium-sized businesses in the UK.

Many British tech companies also earn a large proportion of their revenue outside of Britain, and argue they need unrestricted access to the European market in order to compete effectively.

The UK’s technology trade association, techUK, said that the result of the referendum was not the outcome that the majority of its members were hoping for.

"To succeed, the UK tech sector needs great people, great infrastructure, world-class science and research, unfettered access to global markets, and a world-class smart and predictable regulatory environment," said Julian David, CEO of techUK.

"Without the benefits of EU membership, the UK needs to be at its very best to succeed.

"Today, at techUK we start work with our members to map out this new future. There will be a long to-do list with many policy and regulatory issues requiring urgent action."

Many individual technology leaders have also expressed their bitter disappointment at the result of the EU referendum .

Richard Branson said that leaving the EU would do "huge damage to Britain's prosperity and Europe's stability":

Ian Livingstone CBE, vice chair of the Association for United Kingdom Interactive Entertainment, resorted to gamer-speak:

Henry Joseph-Grant, who helped to build JUST EAT in the UK from start up to IPO, said: "The UK economy has benefited from a growing tech industry, we have had some truly global companies launch and be headquartered here, and the future looks very uncertain.

"I am hugely disappointed that our ageing population has had such a definitive say in the lives of the younger population who quite clearly wanted to remain."

19-year-old entrepreneur James Anderson, who founded the non-profit organisation Thinkspace, said leaving the EU would have a "catastrophic impact" on British businesses and jobs.

"I deeply worry that if businesses are unable to successfully operate and grow in this country, thousands of talented young entrepreneurs and coders may opt to emigrate from Britain to other geographies that provide them with a far greater visible stability for their futures," he said.

"Our country needs access to this talent and reinvestment into the British economy more than ever before. This outcome would be a huge blow for the United Kingdom."

However, others in the technology industry were more stoical about the result - including Rohan Silva, a former technology advisor to Prime Minister David Cameron .

Others also tried to take a more positive view of the situation.

"The British people have demonstrated, throughout their 2000 year history, an incredible capacity to get the most out of any situation - even the worst ones," said French-born Vincent Delaroche, chief executive of software company CAST.

"I am confident that British Tech CEOs know how to instill confidence within their company and have the ability to seek out those with the budgets to pay for their innovations."

Andreas Voniatis, chief executive of London-based artificial intelligence company Artios, added that business is about the survival of the fittest.

"Despite the fact that over 80% of my customers are non-UK based, most of the people I work with are technically immigrants, and that we are applying for technology grants in the EU, I believe the Brexit will make the UK economically stronger," he said.

"Okay we won't be able to benefit from EU technology grants, but these are extremely competitive and we still have our own version in the Innovate UK. If your business and country's economy are fit, you have nothing to fear."

Tudor Aw, head of the technology sector at KPMG UK, added that technology is a sector that will only increase in importance, and works without borders.

"My view is that the core attributes that make the UK Tech sector so strong and attractive remain in place, including an amazing talent base that has a long track record of creativity such as Alan Turing’s first working computer to Tim Berners-Lee’s World Wide Web," he said.

How do you think Brexit will affect the UK's technology industry? Let us know in the comments below.

