Make the EU Referendum Victory in Europe Day and vote Remain for the sake of the future

2016-06-18

This is the legendary cartoon by Philip Zec published in the Daily Mirror on Victory in Europe Day 1945.

The Mirror repeated it on the day of that year’s General Election and it is widely credited with Labour winning it – and giving birth to the NHS three years later.

Zec’s passion for freedom was so widely known the Nazis had him on their invasion hitlist.

It was Zec’s message which lay behind the creation of the European Coal and Steel Community which would develop into the EU.

Europe had found peace. It could not afford to lose it again. And the best way to ensure that was for former enemies to club together as friends.

On Thursday you must decide whether Britain turns her back on that. Or not.

The referendum has been overshadowed by the appalling killing of Jo Cox.

Our ComRes poll today shows a surge of support for Remain in the immediate aftermath of that tragedy.

Read more: Jo Cox's death sparks EU referendum poll surge for Remain as tragedy changes opinion

We report that fact without comment. It would demean Jo’s memory to make political capital out of that.

Our second cartoon shows Europe as it is now. It is much repaired since Zec’s day.

Brexiteers argue that by leaving it we would regain our sovereignty, what they call getting our country back.

That means going back to our past. You must decide if that past can become our future.

The past can be a wonderful nostalgic dream, the idealised Britain fondly imagined by John Major as containing “long shadows on county grounds, warm beer, dog lovers and pools fillers and old maids bicycling to Holy Communion through the morning mist”.

The past also contained tuberculosis and rickets, polio and smallpox, fewer workplace rights and “No Dogs, No Irish, No Blacks” signs in pub windows.

The past was unkinder than the present, a place in which same sex relationships were not just a sin but a crime, and pride meant the most inventive way of putting Johnny Foreigner’s nose out of joint.

Now it is hate which is the crime and international organisations are the community halls of the 21st Century global village that we must live in.

We’ve pooled our sovereignty with NATO because an attack on one is an attack on all and no one suggests we leave that.

We’ve pooled our sovereignty with the United Nations because our decisions are subject to Vladimir Putin’s veto and no one suggests we leave that.

No international organisation is perfect, but we have yet to find a better way than the UN to maintain relative peace.

The EU is not perfect, but it makes it inconceivable France and Germany will ever go to war again.

Brexiteers now claim we can magic up sovereignty by leaving the international organisation which gives us access to 500 million customers and feeds three million British jobs which go with that.

What we will get back by leaving is more control over immigration. If your child lost the school place you set your heart on, or you cannot get a GP appointment or you blame EU migrants for taking jobs, Brexit can be your revenge.

But if your life has been saved by one of the 50,000 EU migrants who keep our hospitals on their feet you may wish to think twice before cutting the NHS off at the knees.

Ignore an Australian-style entry system. It’s designed for countries with migrant populations proportionately larger than ours.

Ignore a Norway-style free trade deal. EU citizens would enjoy the same freedom of movement they do now.

The 330,000 migrants who arrive here annually need to be addressed, but Brexit does not do it.

Brexiteers promise a prosperous economic future outside the EU. David Cameron promises economic disaster unless we stay in.

Neither can be certain of either. All that is certain is that without the EU our economic future is less certain.

That’s why the Pound is wobbling at the prospect and home buyers are not buying.

Mr Cameron says every household will be £4,300 a year worse off – using maths which would shame a toddler.

Boris Johnson is a few beads short of an abacus if he really thinks we send £350million a week to Brussels when £240million of it comes straight back.

If the figures cannot be trusted then we must trust to our feelings. If we do not want to live in the past let’s at least learn lessons from it.

EU Referendum countdown

Philip Zec implored us not to lose the freedoms won with the blood of our soldiers, sailors and pilots – many of them Poles, Czech, Irish and French.

Voting Brexit would snatch defeat from the jaws of that victory.

This referendum is not just about our previous history. Where you put your X on the ballot paper is about making our own history.

It is not about our past, but how we forge our future. And it is a once in a lifetime opportunity.

This is truly the battle for Britain. Make Thursday Victory in Europe Day.

