How Brexit will affect the UK's place in the annual Eurovision song contest

2016-06-24

Britain wakes to an uncertain future this Friday after a 24-hour Brexit vote to leave the United Kingdom secured a majority - raising endless questions about the future of the UK - and its economy.

Perhaps not the most pivotal of questions, but one that thousands of 'remain' voters are now asking: Does Britain still have a place in the Eurovision Song Contest?

Well the good news is, we will still be able to take part in the annual singing tournament - but whether Brexit will result in 'nil' points on repeat though, we can't comment on.

Prime Minister David Cameron, who on Friday announced that he will be stepping down in October , addressed the future of Britain's place in the Eurovision during PMQs back in April.

Labour MP Helen Goodman asked him to “tell the house what the worst argument he’s heard from Brexiters is”, to which he replied: “I think probably the one that we’d get out of the Eurovision Song Contest.

"Not only would that be incredibly sad but given that Israel and Azerbaijan and anyone anywhere near Europe seems to be able to enter - and Australia - then I think we’re pretty safe from that one.”

And he's right.

All members of the European Broadcasting Union - a completely separate organisation to the EU , have the right to take part in Eurovision - and the United Kingdom is on its 43-strong list of members.

In fact, the UK has been a participant of the Eurovision Song Contest since 1957, 16 years before joining the then EEC.

UK Eurovision fan club president, Alasdair Rendall also set the matter straight when concerns first arose back in May.

“No, we would not be barred", he explained.

“The EBU, which is totally independent of the EU, includes countries both inside and outside of the EU, and also includes countries such as Israel that are outside of Europe. Indeed, the UK started participating in the Eurovision Song Contest in 1957, 16 years before joining the then EEC.”

Countries that annually take part in Eurovision but are not part of the EU include Iceland, Norway, Switzerland, Serbia, Albania, Georgia and Russia.

There’s also Australia – who joined the contest as a 'guest nation' for the 60th anniversary in 2015 and made a return this year.

