Top Tory who quits Brexit campaign to join Remain is targeted by death threats

2016-06-20

 A Tory peer was targeted with vile death threats after switching from Brexit to Remain. 

Sick Twitter uses joked about shooting former minister Syeeda Warsi - as politicians gathered in Westminster to remembered murdered MP Jo Cox, who was gunned down last week.

 Baroness Warsi quit the Leave camp in protest at its “lies, xenophobia and the politics of hate”, she said . 

“This kind of nudge-nudge, wink-wink xenophobic racist campaign may be politically savvy or politically useful in the short term, but it causes long-term damage to communities,” Lady Warsi told the BBC.

 “The vision that me and other Brexiters who have been involved right from the outset - who had a positive outward-looking vision of what a Brexit vote might mean - unfortunately those voices have now been stifled and what we see is the divisive campaign which has resulted in people like me and others who are deeply Eurosceptic and want to see a reformed relationship feel that they now have to leave Leave.” 

The peer was subjected to vile taunts online after the defection.

One Twitter user, @leenjenny, wrote: “If I was in a locked room with a gun, 3 bullets, Warsi, Stalin & Hitler I’d shoot Warsi. 3 times.”

But Lady Warsi added: “Toxic, divisive & xenophobic political campaigning should have no place in a liberal democracy. The politics of hate should always fail.”

 She also compared Brexit -backing Cabinet Minister Michael Gove to the British National Party, tweeting: “The #Leave line up - BNP, Le Pen, Donald Trump, Geert Wilders, Farage, Gove. I wouldn’t get on a night bus with them would you?” 

 Read more: 

Asked about Lady Warsi comparing Michael Gove to the BNP in a tweet, anti-EU Employment Minister Priti Patel said: “There’s no need for personal comments.

  

“How does that help to inform the debate? I just think comments like that do not help to inform the British public when it comes to making a decision on how to vote on June 23.”

Ms Patel said Lady Warsi was “one voice in this campaign”.

 Read more: 

She added: “I think the voices that we need to listen to in this referendum are the voices of the British public, and they will decide the outcome of this referendum on Thursday.”

Vote Leave sources played down the peer’s role in the battle for Britain to leave the EU on Thursday.

And UKIP leader Nigel Farage claimed her defection was “the biggest put-up job I’ve ever seen”, saying she “never supported Britain leaving in the first place”.

 But Lady Warsi insisted: “I’ve been making the case for leave long before Vote Leave had even formally been established, campaigning for Brexit last summer, building the foundation of bringing on different communities to make sure that their voice too would be heard in this Brexit campaign.” 

