Stock market panic as £124 BILLION wiped off value of UK companies in 10 minutes after Brexit decision

2016-06-24

The stock market crashed within 10 minutes of its opening this morning with £124 billion wiped off the value of UK companies after Britain voted to leave the European Union.

The FTSE 100 plunged nearly 500 points to 5,880 - down 7.19% - as experts warned of more carnage to come.

If it closes the day down that much, it could be the biggest one day drop in the index’s history.

The market opened at 6,338.10, with its lowest point so far 5,788.74.

Banks bore the brunt of the fall, with Barclays down 27%, Royal Bank of Scotland down 28% and Lloyds taking a 24% dive.

Dennis de Jong, managing director of UFX.com, said: "This is simply unprecedented. The pound has fallen off a cliff and the FTSE is now following suit. Britain's EU referendum has been a cloud hanging over the global economy for the past few months and that cloud has got very dark this morning.

"The markets despise uncertainty, yet that is exactly what they're faced with this morning. The shockwaves are likely to reverberate for some time and the warning lights are flashing brighter now than ever."

Read more: 

The pound has plunged against the dollar to its lowest level since 1985 as Britain voted for Brexit.

Sterling dipped below $1.35 after shock Leave declarations in Sheffield and Sunderland - outstripping its previous low and reaching levels not seen for three decades.

In almost unprecedented scenes the pound's value tumbled more than 10 cents in just a few hours.

Market analysts Bloomberg reported that it was the quickest drop in the value of the pound since 1971.

Read more:  

Meanwhile the Bank of England says it's ready to unleash an extra £250billion to get lenders through any Brexit crisis.

Governor Mark Carney insisted “we are well prepared for this”.

And he stressed that lenders had amassed a more than £600billion safety cushion of capital which they can call on.

However, his message had a limited affect on investors following a slump in share prices.

The fall after Sheffield's shock Leave result came hours after the pound took a sharp dip against the dollar earlier tonight after Sunderland voted decisively for Brexit.

The northern city was always expected to vote Leave but rolled home with more than 61% for an Out vote - more than expected.

Reuters reports Sterling fell as low as $1.4351 against the dollar, more than wiping out all its gains that had lifted it above $1.50 for the first time this year on the back of an earlier YouGov opinion poll.

