Brexit vote could mean 2 MILLION Brits become illegal immigrants - including 14,000 in Benidorm

2016-06-18

Two million Brits living abroad could effectively become illegal migrants in a Brexit vote - including 14,000 who have made their home in Benidorm.

One-fifth of the Spanish town’s population is British and living within the EU means their pensions are protected while the European Health Insurance card gives full medical care.

But these perks could vanish if we leave the EU – putting Benidorm Brits in a legal limbo.

Single mum-of-two Wendy Smith, 29, moved from Warrington to Benidorm in 2014 with sons Tyler, seven, and Kenzie, six.

The boys attend a Spanish school and live in a five-bedroom villa – with pool – alongside Wendy’s mum and sister. Her brother and another sister live and work nearby.

Wendy, manageress of Churchill’s Pub just off the town’s main strip in so-called Little Britain, said: “It would be devastating if we had to go back to England. We’re making a new life here and the boys love it.

“Unless Spain kicks me out I’ll never move back.”

Read more: Separating fact from fiction in the referendum campaign

But Wendy says she understands why many Brits want to vote Brexit.

She added: “The country seems to be being overrun with people coming in and claiming everything for free. Spain doesn’t give me any money or benefits and we don’t expect any.

“England has become a soft touch and people are angry about it.”

Benidorm’s British business owners fear a Brexit might lead to employment quotas forcing them to hire more Spanish workers.

Retired rugby league player Tad Dawson, 51, owns four villas and five bars and employs 56 people – all but three of them British.

He moved to Benidorm from Castleford, West Yorks, 23 years ago.

He said outside his Yorkshire Pride bar: “Everybody’s worried. I don’t want to lose my staff and they don’t want to go back.

“I’m advising all staff who have been here long enough to apply for residency straight away so they’ll be protected. Around half don’t have it.”

EU Referendum countdown

Danny Shears, 36, from Barking, Essex, manages The Queen Vic pub. He has lived in Benidorm for 15 years, so is not yet eligible for residency.

Danny said: “My missus has residency but I haven’t, so if the worst came to the worst we would have to move back. I could lose my livelihood and the life I enjoy here.”

Retired joiner Bill Parkinson, 69, originally from Bolton, Lancs, is hoping for an “In” vote.

He said: “It’s cheaper to wash your car in wine than water here, it really is. Hopefully everything will work out all right.”

