Boris Johnson and David Cameron "gnawed away at each other's testicles" during Tory EU referendum civil war

2016-06-24

 Boris Johnson and David Cameron "gnawed away at each other's testicles" during the Tory civil war which blighted the EU referendum , Ken Livingstone has said. 

 The former London mayor bemoaned the coverage of the struggle between Mr Johnson and the outgoing Prime Minister , claiming it was at the expense of other issues and Labour's campaigning. 

 Mr Livingstone, who is suspended from the Labour Party after claiming that Adolf Hitler supported Zionism, told Sky News: "The Labour Party spent almost £2 million on this referendum campaign. Jeremy was out every day doing speeches. 

"But the television, I have to say it's incredible - there's only about 4% of the coverage that was of Labour people.

"It was like the whole of the media was obsessed by this sort of struggle between Cameron and Johnson as they gnawed away at each other's testicles.

"It was like civil war in the Tory party, not a debate about the economy."

 Read more : 

 Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn is under mounting pressure from within his party following accusations his support for Remain was lukewarm. 

 But Mr Livingstone, when questioned if Mr Corbyn should carry any blame for the outcome of the referendum in favour of Brexit , said: "None whatsoever. 

"Jeremy was telling the truth. If Jeremy had been popping up saying 'This is the most wonderful institution, we shouldn't have any problems with it', everyone would have known he was lying.

"What he said was we should stay in but we should reform it, we need to democratise it, get rid of the horrendous bureaucracy - let euro MPs actually run it, they're directly elected.

"The simple fact is Labour's vote in our traditional strongholds has been declining for decades and it's not because of Jeremy, he's only been leader for the last year.

 Read more : 

"It's because the last Labour government didn't rebuild our manufacturing, it didn't build council houses for working class kids to live in and so on and it's that sense among the working class - not just here, but in America and across Europe - that for the last 20 or 30 years the super-rich have cornered all the wealth that's been created and ordinary working-class people have seen their quality of life diminished.

"I think that's true."

