Gordon Brown makes EU referendum Remain plea as he says debate has descended into Tory row

2016-06-16

Gordon Brown warned the EU debate has descended into a row between 'Tory dinner party sets' as he urged Labour voters to back Remain.

The former PM shared a stage in Manchester with the current shadow chancellor John McDonnell in a rare show of strength and unity across the Labour Party .

Mr McDonnell warned Vote Leave have already set up a 'shadow Brexit Cabinet' and are planning to take David Cameron 'hostage' if they win to push through their right-wing agenda.

And Mr Brown said the debate must now urgently focus on how Europe can create the jobs of the future - instead of the endless blue-on-blue attacks within the Conservatives.

“This debate cannot any more be a debate between one Tory elite and another Tory elite,” Mr Brown raged.

“It cannot any more be between one London dinner party set and another London dinner party set.

“This has got to be a debate about what it means for that individual who is worried about their job, or where their next job is coming from.”

Read more: Boris Johnson meets Vote Leave supporter sporting an English Defence League tattoo

Mr Brown said the EU single market will be the main source of jobs for years to come and called on parents to think of their children's future when they vote.

“My answer to the mother and the father, worried about the future of their children, is that the biggest job creator over the next 10 years is going to be the single market of the European Union. And we must be there,” he said.

“There is no growth to full employment in Britain that does not lead through the European Union.

“Ask the car worker, who knows hundreds of thousands of car jobs are dependant on exports to the EU.

“Ask the worker in the aviation industry, because thousands of their jobs are dependant on us selling products to Europe.

“They will tell you it's exporting to Europe that creates the jobs.”

Mr Brown joked he was now just 'the warm-up act' for shadow chancellor Mr McDonnell and showered praise on his Labour colleague as a 'fighter for social justice'.

Mr McDonnell was equally scathing about the Tory civil war that has dominated the campaign but also urged voters to back Remain next week.

Slamming the “hyperbole and exaggeration” from both sides, the shadow chancellor warned: “It's turned people off. And it's squeezed out Labour's voice.”

But he added: “The Labour family has now come together with absolute clarity – the Labour message is to Remain.”

Mr McDonnell said 'Leave' voters will be backing a 'Tory Brexit ' and issued a stark warning about the consequences for Britain.

And he painted a stark picture of how right-wingers like Michael Gove, Iain Duncan Smith and Nigel Farage will take over the Government if Britain backs a 'Tory Brexit ' next week.

EU Referendum countdown

“The reality is we have now got a Brexit shadow shadow cabinet,” he said.

“They sit there in Portcullis House (in Parliament), IDS and all the rest of them, plotting what positions they are going to take.

“They may leave Cameron there for a period, as long as they get their hands on the legislative powers to negotiate the Brexit and introduce a new programme of legislation.

“He might be a token figure for a period until they allow him to move on. But he will be a hostage. That is my fear. That is the reality of what could happen.”

