ISIS calls for attacks in Berlin and Brussels to 'paralyse' Europe in wake of Brexit chaos

2016-06-24

Islamic State has expressed its delight for the expected negative economic impact on the United Kingdom and the European Union following the British referendum - and called for attacks in Berlin and Brussels to “paralyse” Europe.

A jihadi Telegram - an encrypted messaging service popular with militants - praised the economic chaos that came in the wake of the EU Referendum and urged followers to strike at the heart of mainland Europe, according to terror threat monitor Site.

UK military chiefs have warned there is a "serious and direct threat to holiday resorts across Europe'"from groups like ISIS.

The Foreign Office (FCO) says "there is considered to be a heightened threat of terrorist attack globally against UK interests and British nationals from groups or individuals motivated by the conflict in Iraq and Syria".

Anti-terror police are believed to have foiled a major terror attack planned to take place during Ireland's Euro 2016 match with Belgium.

Belgian authorities say the plot required "immediate intervention" after they arrested 12 people in Brussels.

The Belgian's team - nicknamed the Red Devils - are due to play the Republic of Ireland in Bordeaux at 2pm this afternoon.

Read more:  

It is believed the attack was due to take place in the Belgium capital while fans watched the match on TV.

Farouk Özgünes, from Flemish public broadcaster VTM said: "The suspects were planning to carry out attacks while the Red Devils were playing a match at the European Championships this weekend.

"Perhaps they were planning to commit another attack today in Brussels."

Two men charged with giving money to Brussels bomb suspect Mohamed Abrini are due to stand trial in November.

Read more:  

Mohammed Ali Ahmed, 26, and Zakaria Boufassil, 26, are accused of meeting Abrini - referred to by Belgian police as "the man in the hat" - at Small Heath Park in Birmingham last year between July 9 and 16 where they allegedly handed over £3,000.

Abrini, who is in custody over the attack at Brussels airport in March which killed 16 people, is also a suspect in last year's attacks on Paris which killed 130.

The pair face one count of arranging the availability of money for use in terrorism on or before July 7 2015 under section 17 of the Terrorism Act 2000.

They appeared at the Old Bailey on Thursday via videolink from HMP Wandsworth.

