Defiant Jeremy Corbyn says he won't resign after Labour MPs launch Brexit leadership coup

2016-06-24

Jeremy Corbyn has refused to resign in a defiant interview after it emerged a no confidence motion has been tabled against him.

 The Labour leader faces a post- Brexit coup to be submitted to the Parliamentary Labour Party on Monday night after he was accused of a lacklustre campaign to keep Britain in the EU. 

 Veteran MP Margaret Hodge put forward the motion after David Cameron 's shock resignation and called on Mr Coryn to "do the decent thing, as David Cameron has done." 

She added: “I think the European referendum was a test of leadership and Jeremy failed that test.

 Read more: 

“He came out too slowly, he was very half-hearted about his attempts to campaign and Labour voters simply didn’t get the message.”

But asked if he would resign tonight, Mr Corbyn told Channel 4 News: "No, I’m carrying on.

"I’m making the case for unity, I’m making the case of what Labour can offer to Britain, of decent housing for people, of good secure jobs for people, of trade with Europe and of course with other parts of the world.

"Because if we don’t get the trade issue right we’ve got a real problem in this country."

The Labour leader also had a tense clash with Channel 4 News host Jon Snow after he challenged him to say the phrase "I want to be Prime Minister".

Mr Corbyn said: "Of course I want to lead this party. Of course I want to lead this party in order to put forward an alternative and lead this party to win the election as soon as it comes.”

Asked again he said: “Well you heard it here first, of course I want to be.”

The Labour leader added: "Margaret [Hodge] is obviously entitled to do what she wishes to do.

 "I would ask her to think for a moment, a Tory prime minister resigned, Britain’s voted to leave the European Union, there are massive political issues to be addressed, is it really a good idea to start a big debate in the Labour Party when I was elected less than a year ago with a very large mandate not from MPs, I fully concede and understand that, but from the party members as a whole.” 

