Anonymous hackers back Brexit vote in scathing tweet blasting 'European elites who put wealth over people'

2016-06-24

Anonymous hackers have thrown their weight behind Brexit in a scathing tweet blasting European elites who put wealth over people.

 As millions of Brits cast their votes in yesterday's historic EU referendum , the secretive global hacking network took to Twitter to pledge their support to the Leave campaign. 

Using the hastag #VoteLeave, the Anonymous affiliated account @YourAnonNews insisted that a vote to exit the European Union would send a clear message to "neoliberals" whose trade agreements put wealth first.

Neoliberalism, which favours private over public sector control of the economy, is considered to be the predominant political and economical philosophy of those who hold power within the EU.

 Read more: 

 The tweet, which was posted at 4.55pm yesterday, read: "#  VoteLeave is a message to the neoliberals, we're fed up with trade agreements that put wealth over people." 

 On another account linked to the hacking group - which has no central control - one tweet claims a vote for Brexit is "a vote of confidence for life beyond a 2-party system". 

However, the account, @AnonyOps, added that they do not endorse any individual party.

It comes after Anonymous unveiled its plan to take the political system and remodel it - with the help of its own party.

 The hacktavist group has revealed The Humanity Party, or THumP, to unite everyone under a banner of peace. 

Although previously targeting politics from the outside, THumP is intended to help Anonymous get into the political world and change it from within.

 The organisation shared details in a press release which stated that THumP will not use "tactics of fear and intimidation" as the party says that these methods have "never worked to unite humanity" or to "promote peace". 

The name Anonymous has previously been "a loosely associated international network of activist and hacktivist entities" with no strictly defined philosophy or purpose.

 The hacking group's Brexit tweet comes after Britain voted to leave the European Union, forcing the resignation of Prime Minister David Cameron and dealing the biggest blow to the European project of greater unity since World War Two. 

Global financial markets plunged on Friday as results from a referendum showed a near 52-48 percent split for leaving a bloc that Britain joined more than 40 years ago.

The pound fell as much as 10 percent against the dollar to touch levels last seen in 1985, on fears the decision could hit investment in the world's fifth-largest economy, threaten London's role as a global financial capital and usher in months of political uncertainty.

World stocks headed for one of the biggest slumps on record, and billions of dollars were wiped off the value of European companies.

Britain's big banks took a $130 billion battering, with Lloyds and Barclays falling as much as 30 percent at the opening of trade.

 Read more: 

The United Kingdom itself could now break apart, with the leader of Scotland - where nearly two-thirds of voters wanted to stay in the EU - saying a new referendum on independence from the rest of Britain was "highly likely".

An emotional Cameron, who led the "Remain" campaign to defeat, losing the gamble he took when he called the referendum three years ago, said he would leave office by October.

"The British people have made the very clear decision to take a different path and as such I think the country requires fresh leadership to take it in this direction," he said in a televised address outside his residence.

 Read more: 

"I do not think it would be right for me to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination," he added, appearing to choke back tears before walking back through the black door of No 10.

The result emboldened eurosceptics in other member states, with populist leaders in France and the Netherlands demanding their own referendums to leave.

The vote will initiate at least two years of divorce proceedings with the EU, the first exit by any member state.

Cameron - who has been premier for six years and called the referendum in a bid to head off pressure from domestic eurosceptics - said it would be up to his successor to formally start the exit process.

 His Conservative Party rival Boris Johnson, the former London mayor who became the most recognisable face of the "Leave" camp, is now widely tipped to seek his job. 

Johnson left his home to jeers from a crowd in the mainly pro-EU capital. He spoke to reporters at Leave campaign headquarters, taking no questions on his personal ambitions.

"We can find our voice in the world again, a voice that is commensurate with the fifth-biggest economy on Earth," he said.

