Preppers take on the EU referendum: Historic Brexit decision 'won't be taken lying down' say survival experts

2016-06-22

 It's less than a day until Britain decides whether or not to stay as part of the European Union. 

But one group is making sure it survives the outcome - whatever the result.

They're a tight-knit community called "preppers" who dedicate their lives to understanding how to thrive in times of crisis.

Made up of survival experts and self-taught hobbyists, the preppers have issued a rallying call for how to deal with the results of tomorrow's referendum.

 "Whichever side of the fence you sit on, it would be foolish to think that the result won't have a massive effect on everyone," said a blog post written on preppersshop.co.uk . 

"With an issue as passionate as this, there will be a lot of unhappy people whatever the result.

"To think that it will be taken lying down would be foolish."

 What follows is valued advice on potential worst-case outcomes of either a Brexit or the decision to remain. 

Social unrest, job losses and a drop in the value of the pound are all covered as possible dangers.

Alongside stocking up on foreign currency, including euros and dollars, the community also recommends increasing food and fuel supplies for the next few days.

"As preppers we know we need to prepare for instances like this," said the post.

It stopped short of saying which decision was the best one, but it did end with this statement:

"As preppers we also know we need to take control back from large powers and there is only one way to do this.

"Is this perhaps the start of the revolution?"

To those unfamiliar with prepping, it deals with insuring yourself and your family against possibly deadly "what-if" scenarios.

Natural and man-made disasters are all part of the prepper handbook and the community (which started in the United States) is ready for the fallout.

If you're thinking of getting into prepping, these are a few of the terms you need to understand.

 BOB - Bug-Out Bag. This is your emergency bag that should always be packed with essentials like a knife, water purification tablets and a sleeping bag. 

 SHTF - S**t Hits The Fan. This is the situation in which you need to grab your BOB - be it a nuclear explosion, earthquake or zombie apocalypse. 

 EDC - Everyday Carry. Equipment you should have on you at all times. 

 FAK - First Aid Kit. 

 Zombies - Non-preppers. Basically, everyone else. 

 TEOTWAWKI - The End Of The World As We Know It. 

