Grief of people in Jo Cox's town is like it were their own family who had been killed

2016-06-17

Grief hangs over this little Pennine town.

 Jo Cox MP , the pride of Birstall, is dead and her people are in mourning. 

And they really are her people. They loved her as much as she was proud of them.

All day, they gathered in silence, in ones and twos, in family groups, round the market square statue of scientist Joseph Priestley, Birstall’s most famous son, which has become an impromptu shrine to the murdered MP.

Some were in tears. All stood in silence. It was a people’s requiem for their Yorkshire lass. The daughter of a factory worker who wasn’t too proud to work on the production line packing toothpaste in her school holidays.

 Read more: Jo Cox was harassed months before her murder 

They laid floral tributes to their feisty champion who went away and made good – but came back to fight for them in Parliament.

One, simply signed “Muslims of Batley” read “In loving memory of our wonderful Jo.” Another simply asked “Why?” Charlotte wrote: “You embodied everything I love about this country”, others read: “You will be remembered for your tireless work for the less fortunate” and “Beautiful woman, beautiful heart”

Ria left a message which read: “the world needs far more people like Jo, not less.”

And “Our community and around the world will remember you” was signed by the Albanian community in Leeds.

Jo was the light of her parents eyes.

But she was the whole town’s slightly-built hero who walked unafraid into the war zones of Darfur and Syria, but was brutally slain outside her constituency office. Their adventurous kid, who they first knew as Joanne Leadbeater, who lived on a boat on the Thames, who married fellow aid worker Brendan Cox and brought him home to Yorkshire.

Their high-flyer in the world of international diplomacy who still had her feet on the ground – a mother of two small children.

This is their loss, and they feel it personally. Ivory Macleod, 40, who works in finance, laid flowers and told me “She will be missed so much. My daughter is at her children’s school. She has done a lot for little children. It’s really sad that this should happen.”

Housewife Safiya Bhana, 33, came with her three year old daughter Amaya, to pay her respects “for a life lost in such a tragic way. It has affected everybody. We thought she was great for our community.”

The famous came too, David Cameron, flanked by Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn and Commons Speaker John Bercow all echoed the same theme. “Evil must not be allowed to triumph.”

As he left through the crowded square, the Prime Minister was challenged by a Muslim woman, Faranda Faraz, about the march by Britain First in nearby Dewsbury in January. He batted the question away, but the atmosphere of a Britain divided by the Euro referendum hung in the air. Brexit was the word nobody spoke yesterday.

I was at Dunblane, where crazed gunman Thomas Hamilton shot 16 children in their school. I was at Lockerbie, where Pan Am flight 103 was downed by a terrorist bomb with the loss of 270 lives. The shock there was profound.

But the grief here is intimate, as if it were their daughter, or sister, or mother who had been gunned down so brutally. “This is a death in the family,” said Huddersfield MP Barry Sheerman.

One tribute, to Dearest Jo, said: “We all love you so much. It is hard to comprehend that something so awful could happen to someone so beautiful.”

It was signed Lucy Powell. She didn’t even mention that she is a fellow Labour MP. Politics took second place yesterday. There was a murmur of approval for the Tories’ announcement that they will not contest the by-election triggered by this foul deed.

Labour will need another woman cut from the same cloth of Jo Leadbeater, as she was when head girl of her local grammar school. If Priestley is Birstall’s most famous son, Jo Cox will forever be the town’s most famous daughter.

A statue to her memory should be erected alongside the scientists who discovered oxygen two centuries ago. But what a truly dreadful way to achieve immortality in the hearts and minds of people.

