David Cameron warns it will be a 'tragedy' if Britain votes for Brexit

2016-06-19

David Cameron came out fighting in his final EU referendum showdown, warning it would be a “tragedy” if Britain went for Brexit based on Leave camp lies.

The Prime Minister exploded into life in a BBC Question Time special after an audience member compared him to Nazi appeaser Neville Chamberlain.

Mr Cameron shot back that walking out on Europe would be “quitting”.

He said: “At my office I sit two yards away from the Cabinet room where Winston Churchill made the decision to fight on against Hitler. He didn’t quit.

“He didn’t quit on Europe. He didn’t quit on European democracy, he didn’t quit on European freedom.”

The audience cheered as he went on: “We want to fight for those things today. You can’t win, you can’t fight, if you’re not in the room. You can’t win a football match if you’re not on the pitch.”

The PM’s EU reform deal had been attacked by an audience member, who claimed it could be “overruled” by a “dictatorship” in Brussels.

Read more: David Cameron explodes as Question Time audience member compares him to Nazi appeaser Neville Chamberlain

An enraged Mr Cameron hit back: “This is not some empire or dictatorship. If Britain wants to leave this organisation, we can. We are a sovereign country.

“But let us be clear, if we do leave, that’s it. We are walking out the door, we are quitting, we are giving up on this organisation, which, even if we leave, will have a huge effect on our lives.

“And I don’t think Britain in the end is a quitter. I think we stay and fight.”

Mr Cameron tore into Vote Leave claims that Turkey was poised to join the EU in the next three years.

He insisted it would be “30 or 40 years” before Turkey got membership, and said: “It is a red herring. People who have decided to vote leave, obviously it’s a choice, it’s a referendum.

“But to do it on the basis of Turkey joining the EU, you would be voting to leave an organisation, to damage our economy, on the basis of something that is not going to happen. And that would be a crazy thing to do.”

Mr Cameron slammed Vote Leave’s other “untruths” – that the EU is planning to create its own army and that Britain’s membership costs us £350million a week.

He said: “I don’t want anyone to vote on the basis of Turkey joining, because it is not going to happen.

"Just like the EU Army is not going to happen, just like the £350million isn’t true.”

He said: “It would be a tragedy if we damaged our economy, wrecked job prospects in our country on the basis of three things that are completely untrue.”

The PM’s campaign receives a major boost today as the bosses of Jaguar Land Rover, Toyota, BMW and Vauxhall warn that quitting the EU could put jobs and investment at risk.

In a statement organised by the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders they say Brexit could threaten 800,000 jobs supported by the motor industry, which contributes £15.5billion to the economy, with 57.7% of the cars exported abroad going to the EU.

Vauxhall chairman, Rory Harvey, said: “We believe not to be part of the EU would be undesirable for our business.”

And underlining the dangers of leaving, Chancellor George Osborne told Peston on Sunday: “If we vote to leave there is no turning back.

“It’s a one-way door to a much more uncertain world where people’s jobs and their livelihoods are at risk,.”

Mr Osborne said estimates that Brexit could shrink the economy by as much as 6% could be too conservative.

He said: “Personally, I think it’s possible that it would be quite a lot worse than that.”

EU Referendum countdown

He said uncertainty over the vote was already affecting the economy as people delayed buying houses and cars.

He said: “They’re delaying investment. This is a taste of things to come.”

It has emerged that major banks are drafting in staff to work through the night on Thursday amid fears a Brexit could cause turmoil in the financial markets.

Some banks have predicted that Brexit could cause the pound to fall to parity with the euro for the first time ever.

