EU referendum poll tracker: Is Britain heading for Brexit?

2016-06-24

The polls have closed and our future is decided - now we just have to wait to find out the EU referendum result.

Polls during the campaign suggested the decision over Britain's future inside or outside Europe would go to the wire. The bookies have consistently given Remain a bigger lead in the betting than they have in the polls, although Leave shortened in the EU referendum betting odds last week before easing again.

Leave gained ground over the closing stages, with increasing numbers of poll results pointing to Brexit, although generally when undecided voters were excluded.

Early indications are of a huge turnout - estimated at just under 84% of the electorate. 

And Ukip leader Nigel Farage has admitted he expects the Remain vote to edge it. 

This is what the polls have been saying so far...

With no general election style exit poll, Sky News commissioned an on the day poll from YouGov. The results showed Remain with its nose in front by 52% to 48%. 

The Remain camp swung back into the lead in the three final polls before the EU referendum.

The final poll conducted before polls opened was by Populus for the Financial Times.

The survey of 4,700 people was conducted right up to midnight last night, and put Remain on 55%.

Populus/Financial Times

Earlier today, Ipsos MORI published a poll for the London Evening Standard, which shows Remain in the lead on 52%.

It was carried out from June 21-22 - right up to 9pm last night - and surveyed 1,592 people.

The poll also found 12% of those surveyed might change their mind in the few short hours before they cast their vote.

Ipsos MORI phone

A survey by ComRes for the Daily Mail and ITV News gave Remain a 6-point lead over Leave - on 48% compared to 42%.

But the phone poll of 1,032 people on June 17-22 also underlined the confusion among voters as 11% of people said they were still undecided.

Comres for the Daily Mail/ITV

The final YouGov survey for The Times, which quizzed a massive 3,766 people online on June 20-22, had each side in a dead heat with 45%.

Yet far more of the 8% who were ‘don’t knows’ said they would probably end up picking Remain - meaning it gains the lead in the final result, 51%/49%.

A YouGov spokesman said: “Our current polling suggests the race is too close to call, but the recent trend has been towards Remain, just as other referendums in the past have shown late movement towards the status quo.

“In this poll we asked people who said they didn’t know how they would vote which way they were leaning and re-allocated them on that basis, an adjustment that increased the position of Remain by a point.”

But the spokesman warned: “It is still possible that people will change their mind on the day.”

YouGov/Times

Two official surveys were published in quick succession on Wednesday night, hours before voters go to the polls.

And they show both camps neck and neck - but with Leave in the lead.

A TNS online poll of 2,320 people on June 16-22 showed a two-point lead for Brexit - with Leave on 43% and Remain on 41%.

Some 11% of voters still said they don't know while another 5% said they don't intend to vote.

ORB/Telegraph

An Opinium poll of 3,011 people from June 20-22, again online, put Leave on 45% and Remain on 44%.

But it found far more people expect the Remain camp to triumph tomorrow (46%) than the Brexit camp (27%). Another 27% don't know how it will do.

ORB/Telegraph

Two days before the referendum, one poll gave Remain a seven-point lead - while another handed a two-point boost to Leave.

Tory election guru Sir Lynton Crosby said the up-and-down polls showed the referendum will "truly come down to the wire."

An ORB poll of 800 people for the Telegraph showed 53% of people who will definitely vote would chose Remain, compared to 46% for Leave.

Among all voters Remain had a smaller two-point lead of 49% to 47% for Leave.

ORB/Telegraph

A separate YouGov online poll of 1,652 people for The Times put Leave two points ahead on 44%, with Remain on 42%.

The survey, carried out on June 17-19, found more voters distrust George Osborne over the vote (73%) than Nigel Farage (63%).

Some 64% of Labour voters said they wanted to remain while 26% said they wanted to leave.

An average of the six most recent polls, carried out between 14 and 20 June, gives Remain a narrow lead.

What UK thinks

Remain has generally been ahead in the poll of polls but Leave has had its nose in front on several occasions as the polling date nears.

ComRes happened to be carrying out a poll for the Sunday Mirror at the time of the MP's murder on Thursday, June 16 at 2pm.

The results were staggering, showing 45% would be 'delighted' to leave the EU before she was shot - dropping to 38% after. There was no headline figure on voting intention.

A Survation phone poll of 1,001 people for the Mail on Sunday after Mrs Cox's death (June 17-18) showed Remain on 45% and Leave on 42%.

A YouGov poll of 1,694 people for the Sunday Times on June 16-17, also after Ms Cox's death, put Remain one point ahead on 44% to 43%.

A YouGov/Good Morning Britain online poll of 1,734 people on June 15-16 had Leave two points ahead on 44% to 42%.

An Opinium online poll of 2,000 people for the Observer on June 14-17, 80% of which was done before Mrs Cox's death, found Remain and Leave even on 44% each.

Polls in the week to June 19

The monthly phone poll showed Leave in a six point lead when undecided voters are excluded. A fifth of the 1,257 people surveyed said they may still change their mind.

Remain's lead had fallen six points on the previous ComRes telephone poll (for the Daily Mail) in May, giving them a single point lead over Leave. The conflicting pressures of the economy and immigration paint a contradictory picture, with 61% of people saying they would accept a short term economic slowdown to tighten immigration, but 68% saying they would not being happy to pay any of their own personal annual income to tighten the control Britain has over immigration.

ComRes for The Sun

One of three polls released on the same day suggesting the mood is swinging to Leave, the YouGov poll of 1,905 people put Brexit on 46% with Remain on 39%. Once 'don't knows' were excluded the lead was even higher, with Leave on 54% and Remain on 46%. The Leave lead had jumped six points in just three days.

YouGov for the Times

A pair of phone and online polls by ICM for the Guardian both gave Brexit a six point lead with Don't Knows excluded - with Downing Street said to have gone from being "utterly convinced" of winning to "blind panic".

ICM for the Guardian

That balance does not hold across all age ranges however, with stark differences between under 34s and pensioners.

ICM for the Guardian

ICM for the Guardian

Leave took the lead among those certain to vote for the first time since the start of April in ORB's phone poll for the Telegraph. Expectations of a Remain win fell to a new low, with 54% believing Britain will vote to stay in the EU.

ORB for the Telegraph

Leave were a single point in front when a panel of 1,671 British adults were questioned. The Remain campaign were picked out as the biggest scare-mongers, highlighted by 41% compared to 21% for Leave.

YouGov for the Sunday Times

But the poll also clearly showed opinions of politicians are changing through their campaigning on the EU referendum - with losses in reputation generally outweighing gains.

YouGov for The Sunday Times

YouGov for The Sunday Times

The two sides remained finely balanced in the online poll of 2009 UK voters, with undecided voters holding the balance of power - although Remain's position had improved on the previous week's poll. An Opinium study with the LSE also found up to 30% of people will change the way they vote or make up their minds in the week before polling day.

Opinium for the Observer

Sterling fell on the news Leave had a 10 point lead in an online poll of 2,000 people by ORB, weighted to take into account likelihood of actually voting.

ORB for the Independent

Remain's lead slipped and voters' indecision was on the increase as Leave narrowed the gap in the Telegraph's weekly poll. Election strategist Sir Lynton Crosby emphasised the result could come down to voter turnout, with the Leave campaign supporters more likely to head to the polling booths.

ORB for the Telegraph

Remain edged back in front in the YouGov poll - but the Leave campaign was rated the more honest and positive. Keeping the free trade relationship was considered more important than control over immigration.

The importance of immigration to voters in the EU referendum was highlighted as a potential reason for Leave's support continuing to grow, as 41% say it is in their top two issues when deciding how to vote.

Opinium for the Observer

The Leave campaign had gained three points on the previous Observer poll, with undecided voters among the 2,007 surveyed also leaning less convincingly toward Remain than they had done previously (55% had reduced to 36%). Support for Leave seemed to be stronger in Wales than other parts of the country, although this was only a small sample.

The pound fell in reaction to the news Leave were in the lead in an ICM internet and phone poll for the Guardian. The previous poll in mid May gave Remain a 10 point lead with phone respondents but Leave in the lead on the internet. This time both methods returned a 52-48 split when undecided voters were excluded.

ICM for the Guardian

ICM for the Guardian

The weekly poll for the Telegraph showed a four point swing in support away from Remain, with Leave gaining four points among people who say they will definitely vote. The telephone poll surveyed 800 people last week.

ORB for the Telegraph

While the 5,000 people surveyed were not asked a direct voting question, their answers gave an interesting people of how much harder the Leave vote is than the Remain backers.

The large number of undecided voters (13%) leave the two camps tied on 41% in the online poll - meaning Remain slipped back three points week on week, with Leave gaining one point.

Trust in David Cameron fell two points, with Brexit backer Boris Johnson far more trusted on Europe than the Prime Minister.

YouGov for the Times

Remain's lead grew week on week in the ORB telephone poll - and there has been a big swing in how over 65s will vote over the last two months, helping the In campaign to a 13-point lead.

ORB for Daily Telegraph

ORB for Daily Telegraph

The ComRes telephone poll showed a convincing lead for the Remain campaign - and a big increase in how important voters rate the economy in making their decision. It is now rated one of the three most important factors by 55% of respondents, up from 38% in February.

ComRes for ITV News and Daily Mail

A telephone poll by Ipsos Mori produced the biggest difference between the camps seen for some time when undecideds were pushed to say which side they were more likely to fall down on. Voters may not have been buying David Cameron's claim Brexit would risk World War Three, but Remain came out with an 18 point lead.

Ipsos Mori

An online poll for the Times, which takes into account party allegiance to avoid traditional over representation of Labour voters in polls, showed Remain with a four point lead when undecided and non voters were excluded. The proportion of undecided voters is higher among women,

YouGov for The Times

YouGov for The Times

Tory voters are split 50-50 on the referendum, but 77 % of Labour supporters and 64%of Lib Dems are backing Remain. Unsurprisingly, only 3% of Ukip supporters want to stay in the EU.

But while Remain are leading, voters are not convinced about the warnings of the consequences of Brexit - with 48% finding their warnings exaggerated and unrealistic versus 43% for the Leave campaign.

The polls proved unreliable in last year's general election campaign, and with Remain and Leave running neck and neck in many surveys, it is difficult to get a clear picture of what will really happen on June 23. The waters are further muddied by the difference between the results in two ICM polls - one done by telephone, the other on the internet. Phone polls have consistently put Remain ahead, while online polls favour Leave.

ICM for the Guardian 

ICM for the Guardian 

The Remain vote is creeping up in the Telegraph phone poll, up four points since the last poll in April as Leave sank three points, although Leave backers remain the more likely to vote. When it comes to the campaigns themselves, Remain is ahead in the ratings of having the better campaign with a clear message, with 43% choosing them and only 30% for Leave.

ORB for the Telegraph

Almost one in four voters are still unsure what impact the EU referendum could have on their personal finances, the Sunday Mirror's poll showed.

ComRes for the Sunday Mirror and Independent

While the Remain campaign has gained on personal finances, up four points compared to February, it has lost ground on the security argument, dropping four points as Leave rose eight. And there was bad news for David Cameron, with more than twice as many trusting Boris Johnson to tell the truth compared to the Prime Minister.

ComRes for the Sunday Mirror and Independent

The number of people still undecided shows the referendum result remains very much in the balance.

ICM for The Sun on Sunday

Weighting results based on likelihood of turnout gave the Leave campaign a narrow lead, 51 points to 49. Among all voters it was split evenly 50-50.

Barack Obama was the big gun wheeled out by the Remain campaign, with the US President warning Britain would be sent to the back of the queue in negotiating new trade agreements. But reaction to his visit was mixed. A poll for the Times showed support for the Leave campaign had risen three points in a fortnight, with 42% saying they would vote Out and 41% In.

YouGov for the Times

Leave continued to trail the Remain camp, but a Survation poll for IG showed a four point increase in support for Brexit since the company's first survey after David Cameron's EU Renegotiation agreement.

Survation for IG

Remain slipped two points as Leave climbed two, among all voters, while the Out campaign gained three points among those who will definitely vote.

ORB for the Telegraph

The Remain camp were showing an 11 point lead in this poll, up from 7 points the previous month. But voters continued to question the value for money delivered by being in the EU.

ComRes

The impact on the economy (32%) and immigration (27%) remain the issues most likely to affect voters' decisions on whether to vote in or out, the London Evening Standard reported.

Ipsos Mori

This poll predicted increased turnout, with 67 per cent of voters expected to take part, up three points. Leave voters remain more likely to go to the polling booth, but Remain voters were showing increased motivation to cast their vote.

ORB for the Telegraph

A poll to mark the start of the 10-week campaign showed 17 million votes are still up for grabs, with 38 per cent of voters willing to change their mind.

ComRes for the Sun

Jeremy Corbyn was rated more trusted on the referendum than David Cameron, with 28 per cent trusting the Labour leader to 21 per cent who trust the Prime Minister.

YouGov for the Times

The Remain campaign moved ahead of the Leave voters. The steel crisis and Brussels terror attacks were not rated as having a significant influence on voter intentions.

ORB for The Daily Telegraph

The In / Out sides remained close - with the Remain vote in a narrow lead.

ORB for The Independent

David Cameron has put his reputation on the line by calling the EU referendum and nailing his colours to a vote for In. And Brexit could have big consequences for the Prime Minister, as well as for the nation.

Ipsos Mori

A telephone poll of 1,023 adults showed the Remain campaign on 49% and 41% planning to vote Leave.

A poll which questioned 773 of the Confederation of British Industry's 190,000 members showed strong support for the Remain campaign.

ComRes for the CBI

A telephone poll of 823 people showed the economy was the biggest factor for those planning to vote to stay, while immigration was the biggest motivation to vote leave.

ORB for the Daily Telegraph

When likelihood of people actually voting was factored in, the Leave campaign's share rose to 52% with remain dropping to 45%.

A survey of 1,705 adults showed Britain was leaning towards remain - but almost a fifth of voters are still undecided. Among women and 18-24 year-olds this rose to almost a quarter. Those who voted Ukip in last year's election are the most definite about how they will vote, with only a tenth undecided, and 85% planning to vote leave. The majority of Labour voters plan to vote to stay in, with 59% intending to vote remain, compared to 32% of Tory voters.

YouGov

The Leave campaign had a narrow lead, with 52% saying they would vote to quit the EU and 48% voting to stay. But weighting the results based on people's likelihood to cast their vote on June 23 boosted the Leave total to 54% versus 46%. Those aged over 65 are most likely to vote, with 85% saying they definitely will, compared to only 53% of 18 to 24-year-olds.

OBR for The Independent

In a survey carried out between 6 November and 18 December last year, half of MPs said they would vote to remain in the EU whatever new deal David Cameron managed to negotiate.

