Love Island's Tom Powell and Sophie Gradon to split? Couple on the rocks even before ex walks in

2016-06-24

 Will Love Island's Tom Powell and Sophie Gradon sensationally split? 

 As viewers prepare for Tom's ex-girlfriend Emma to waltz into the villa - which looks like it will be explosive - it seems the emotional couple are already on the rocks. 

In tonight's show, ahead of his former lover's arrival Tom and Sophie are having more than a bicker.

At one moment, he even tells Sophie to “please smile, you’ve got a face like a slapped a***.”

 READ MORE: 

 READ MORE: 

Despite showing signs of who strong they are, it seems Tom and Sophie will need everything they've got to make it to the end of the series.

In Friday night's show, Sophie is in the garden when she reveals to the girls that Tom’s mood swings are becoming increasingly difficult for her to handle. 

Sophie says: “For a bit of time I’ve been really conscious of saying the wrong thing or doing the wrong thing because he’s really highly strung. He snaps at the smallest of things. 

"It’s taken a lot for me to warm to him and be affectionate. Sometimes I’ll go to give him a kiss and he’ll push me off. I don’t think he realises that it’s pushing me away a bit.”

Explaining how difficult Tom is to be with, Sophie continues: “He’s so sensitive and I do walk on eggshells around him. I want to be myself in here and not have to worry about what I’m saying. I do worry constantly, because I’m so afraid of upsetting him.”

Realising how different they are as people, Sophie adds: “He wanted me to be his girlfriend and he needs to chill out a bit and not push me away.”

Speaking to Tom about it, Sophie says: “I’m trying to be patient with you and your moods and how you can snap at the smallest of things. Are you quite moody in other relationships? Or is it just because you’re in here?”

Moving away from Sophie, Tom apologises: “I am sorry.”

In an attempt to finish the discussion and move on, Sophie says: “I know you are, you’re always sorry. Let’s just go forward and try and not get moody with each other.” Misreading the mood, Tom tells Sophie: “Please smile, you’ve got a face like a slapped a***.”

Sophie however doesn't appreciated his joke, saying: “Next time you speak to me like that, I’ll tell you you’ve got a face like a slapped arse and let’s see how well it goes down. Honestly, you’re such a hypocrite. The amount of times I try and speak to you and your face is just like what it is now. I just can’t read you sometimes.”

Sophie continues: “You’re just so difficult Tom. We’re hugging one minute and then you move away the next. I’m like ‘What have I done now, I thought we were making up here’. I just don’t know what to do.”

Feeling the heat, Tom asks “do you want to call it quits?” as the couple argue into the night.

Will they split?

Elsewhere on the show, after a few days in the villa without rows, Kady and Scott took time out to consider their relationship status. Meanwhile Adam felt lonelier than ever. With the imminent addition of Tom’s ex to the villa, will his and Sophie’s fragile relationship be pushed past breaking point?

* Love Island continues tonight at 9pm on ITV2

