Britain should be a proper democracy and the only way that can happen is Brexit

2016-06-19

I want Britain to be a proper ­democracy.

For our elected Members of Parliament to be the ones that make the decisions that affect our lives and for those making the ­decisions to be directly accountable to the British people.

Instead, look at the system we have inside the European Union.

European Courts have the power to tell us as a country what we can and cannot do.

The majority of our laws are made by unelected EU Commissioners who nobody has ever heard of and who we cannot vote for or remove.

So many have sacrificed so much over the years to preserve our ­democracy and fight for freedom.

Yet inside the EU we’ve literally handed all of that away.

Not only that, we’ve handed the EU huge amounts of money, money that we should be spending here on our priorities instead.

Read more: On EU Referendum day vote to free Britain from the shackles of Europe

The EU now costs Britain net £34million every single day. The cost is increasing and as the Eurozone continues to fall apart future bailouts are likely to cost us billions more in the future.

How can it be right that we have opened up our borders totally and unconditionally to the EU, allowing anyone with an EU passport to come?

It’s led to a huge migratory flow the likes of which our country has never seen before.

And though the rich may have benefited from cheaper nannies and chauffeurs, British workers have seen their wages fall and their quality of life diminish.

Not just that, but the pressures placed on our schools, hospitals and housing stock have been huge.

Families up and down the country have felt the negative impact of a rapidly growing population and a government unable to plan ahead, not knowing just how many people will be coming to our country from year to year.

It looks set to get worse as well, with the likes of Turkey soon to join the EU backed by David Cameron and Angela Merkel.

EU Referendum countdown

So on June 23rd let’s take back control of our country.

Outside of the EU we can control our borders, make our own laws, act in our own national interest and run our own country.

I believe we are good enough. I believe in the British people. I believe in Britain.

So on Thursday vote to leave the European Union and let’s make it our Independence Day.

