Brexit campaign accused of 'making fake videos' after woman's scream included in Turkish Parliament brawl

2016-06-20

The Brexit campaign has been accused of "making fake videos" after a woman's scream was bizarrely included in footage of a brawl in the Turkish Parliament.

The blood-curdling shriek appears to have been added to scenes of the WWE-style battle on May 2 , which broke out over plans that could see Turkish MPs prosecuted.

Raw footage from the fight between the ruling AK Party and pro-Kurdish politicians was uploaded to YouTube and went around the world, being used by reputable news outlets including the Associated Press.

But when it was used in one of Vote Leave's most popular videos, it included a clear scream that couldn't be heard before.

And the noise sounds awfully like a stock sound effect called "Screams6WomanPanic PE134001" that can be found on this website.

Read more: 

The bizarre alteration was uncovered thanks to painstaking research by The Independent.

James McGrory, campaign director of Britain Stronger in Europe, said: "Not content with telling porkies about Turkey joining the EU – when even Boris Johnson says it’s “not on the cards” – it seems Vote Leave have been reduced to making fake videos too.

"This is entirely in keeping with the character of their campaign. Their argument is based on three big lies – Turkish accession, our contribution to the EU budget, and an EU army – which have repeatedly been shown to be untrue.

"This Thursday, the British people can take the irreversible step of leaving the EU based on the lies of a campaign steeped in post-truth politics.

"Or they can vote for more jobs, lower prices, and a decent, tolerant Britain that works together with Europe."

Vote Leave's clip argued Turkey would soon be joining the EU and has been viewed 400,000 times since June 2.

Despite the Prime Minister saying "I want us to pave the road from Ankara to Brussels" in a previous speech, he has insisted Turkey will not join the EU for at least 30 years.

Vote Leave did not immediately return a request for comment.

