EU Referendum - a timeline of the key events leading up to the big vote

2016-06-23

Today is the day the country will decide whether Britain will Remain in the EU or will Leave.

The vote is hanging on a knife edge with both the Remain and Brexit campaigns taking narrow leads over the past few weeks.

But what have been the key events leading up to the EU Referendum.

After a year as Tory leader, David Cameron urges his party conference to stop “banging on” about Europe

Cameron suffers the biggest post-war rebellion of any Prime Minister as 81 Tory MPs revolt and call for a referendum on Britain’s EU membership

The PM demands “fundamental, far-reaching change” during his landmark Bloomberg speech

Voters elect the first Conservative majority government for 23 years, paving the way for David Cameron’s In/Out referendum

The PM arrives in ​B​erlin for the first stop of a marathon nine-month tour​ of Euro​pean capitals renegotiating Britain’s EU membership.

Cameron reveals his draft EU deal, prompting anger among Tories who believe it does not go far enough

Downing Street sources reveal Michael Gove has decided to defy David Cameron and back Leave campaign in a major blow for the PM

David Cameron secures his EU reform deal in Brussels and announces the referendum will be held on June 23. The PM says he will campaign “heart and soul” to keep Britain in Europe

Five Tory Cabinet Ministers announce they will campaign to leave EU. Justice Secretary Mr Gove is joined by Work and Pensions Secretary Iain Duncan Smith, Culture Secretary John Whittingdale, Commons Leader Chris Grayling and Employment Minister Priti Patel

Boris Johnson reveals he will campaign to Leave. Suddenly the Out camp has its figurehead – and David Cameron knows he has a fight on his hands

Jeremy Corbyn finally intervenes in the EU debate, with a speech at Senate House in London calling for Labour voters to back Remain

Treasury claims each family will be £4,300 worse off by 2030 if Britain leaves the 28-nation bloc. The figure is roundly mocked by Brexiteers

Barack Obama tells a Downing Street press conference Britain will be at the “back of the queue” for a post-Brexit trade deal

Boris Johnson launches the Vote Leave battle bus in Cornwall. The coach is emblazoned with the claim Britain sends £350million a week to Brussels, unleashing a controversy which rages throughout the campaign.

Official stats show net migration to the UK hit 333,000 in 2015, the second highest on record. The figure prompts a surge for Leave as Brexiteers say the number can only be slashed by quitting the EU

First signs of Downing Street panic as David Cameron holds an emergency press conference on e banks of the Thames to make the case for Remain. Later he and Nigel Farage go back-to-back in a live Question Time-style show on ITV. Thee UKIP leader triggers anger by telling a female audience member to “calm down” after she criticises his campaign

Boris Johnson survives his first live TV showdown of the campaign. The Tory MP comes under sustained attack from an all-female Remain line-up who accuse him of exploiting the referendum to manoeuvre his way into Downing Street

Nigel Farage leads a flotilla up the Thames highlighting the plight of British fishermen. He clashes with pro-EU rock star Sir Bob Geldof in a bizarre nautical stand off

Labour MP Jo Cox is brutally murdered in her West Yorks constituency. All campaigning is suspended as grieving politicians pay tribute to the mother-of-two

Campaigners go head to head at Wembley Arena in the last showpiece debate before polling day

The nation decides on the UK”s EU membership for the first time since 1975

