Nigel Farage complains HE'S the victim of hate as MPs unite to condemn his 'Nazi propaganda' poster

2016-06-19

Nigel Farage has complained HE is the victim of hate as politicians unite to condemn his 'Nazi propaganda' EU referendum poster.

The Ukip leader was reported to police for inciting racial hatred over his picture of people being walked to a refugee camp under the slogan 'BREAKING POINT'.

Today Chancellor George Osborne said the "disgusting and vile poster had echoes of literature used in the 1930s."

 Jeremy Corbyn added: "The far right have been allowed to grasp the agenda - Farage puts up that appalling poster that has a picture of desperate people fleeing from war." 

Yet Mr Farage claimed he, rather than, say, the thousands stuck on the border of Slovenia and Croatia, was the one having hatred whipped up against him.

He told ITV's Peston on Sunday: "I think I'm a politician who's been a victim of it to be honest with you.

Read more:  

"When you challenge the establishment in this country they come after you, they call you all sorts of things.

"All we have said in this referendum campaign is we want to take back control of our lives, take back control of our borders and put in place a responsible immigration policy."

Shocked Labour MP Yvette Cooper said Mr Farage's response was "incredibly depressing".

She called on Leave campaigners more widely to stop using anti-immigrant posters and said: "I think it was extremely ill judged of him to call himself a victim, today." 

 Mr Osborne accused Mr Farage of "whipping up division, making baseless assertions that millions of people are going to come into the country in the next couple of years from Turkey or saying dead bodies are going to wash up on the beaches of Kent". 

 David Cameron wrote in the Sunday Telegraph: "We are going to have to make a defining decision on Thursday: are we going to choose Nigel Farage’s vision – one which takes Britain backwards; divides rather than unites; and questions the motives of anyone who takes a different view. 

"Or will we, instead, choose the tolerant, liberal Britain; a country that doesn’t blame its problems on other groups of people; one that doesn’t pine for the past, but looks to the future with hope, optimism and confidence?"

Tory Brexiter Michael Gove added: "When i saw that poster I shuddered. I thought it was the wrong thing to do."

 Another Brexit -backing Tory, Chris Grayling, told BBC Radio 5 Live's Pienaar's Politics: "I certainly wouldn't choose to do it. It actually distracts from the purpose of the campaign. 

"I don't like it. It's not the right thing to do and it mixes two separate issues we should not mix."

The Archbishop of Canterbury added: "The rhetoric in the media is one that suggests that the UK is 'full', and that those arriving on our shores are a drain on our economy.

"Not only are these assertions unfounded, but they fail to recognise the positive, life-affirming contributions that generations of refugees have made to British society - and that we ourselves are changed by welcoming the stranger."

Asked at the poster's launch if it was racist Mr Farage said: "This is a photograph, an accurate undoctored photograph taken on October 15 last year.

"Frankly if you believe, as I believe, that we should open our hearts to genuine refugees that's one thing. But frankly as you can see in the photograph, most of the people coming are young males.

"And yeah, they may be coming from countries that are not in a very happy state. They may be be coming from places poorer than us. But the EU has made a fundamental error that risks the security of everybody."

Later the Mirror asked him how he could know if people in the poster were "genuine refugees" or not.

Mr Farage replied: "That's the point isn't it."

Later today Mr Farage got into a spat with BBC Radio 5 Live host John Pienaar over his claim violence could be the "next step" if people thought they had lost control over migration.

The Ukip leader said in May: "I think it's legitimate to say that if people feel they have lost control completely, and we have lost control of our borders completely as members of the EU, and if people feel that voting doesn't change anything then violence is the next step.

"I find it difficult to contemplate it happening here but nothing's impossible."

But faced with those quotes today he said: "I'm sorry, that's ridiculous. I have said I don't think it's very likely at all we'll ever see violence on the streets of this country as we've seen in Greece and elsewhere."

Mr Pienaar said: "Nigel, you told me myself in an interview you thought it was a possibility".

The Ukip leader replied: "Extremely unlikely is what I told you over lunch that day and you should remember that very well too.

"Everything in life is possible but I view it as extremely unlikely."

