Labour braced for snap election if Britain votes for Brexit on Thursday

2016-06-21

 Labour is braced for a snap election if Britain votes to leave the EU, Jeremy Corbyn declared today. 

 The party is “very, very ready” to fight a campaign in the aftermath of a Brexit decision, he told activists. 

Rules state there can be no election before 2020.

But some MPs are apparently poised to unpick the Fixed Term Parliaments Act to force an early ballot.

 Westminster has been rife with speculation some Tories could try to topple David Cameron if Britain quits, and replace him with a eurosceptic leader before going to the polls. 

Mr Corbyn said: “If the Government can't continue forever and it ends up deciding it needs to navigate around the Fixed Term Parliaments Act in order to have a general election a little sooner, all I have got to say is we are very, very ready for that.”

Speaking at the People's History Museum in Manchester, the Labour leader also batted away suggestions he has been “lukewarm” in his support for Remain, less than 48 hours before Thursday's crunch referendum.

“You say my views on Europe are 'lukewarm'; I have many, many criticisms of the European Union … does that mean we want to leave or do we think we can help to reform it by linking up with others across Europe? Obviously the latter,” he told reporters.

“I have been listening to all this stuff about an inactive, lacklustre campaign.

“All I know is that in the past month I have been in every major city in this country, I have travelled thousands of miles by train in order to convey this message, and I do believe this message … is getting through – that workers' rights are at risk, that jobs are at risk, and the opportunity to be doing something better is there to be taken.”

He blasted the media for being “totally obsessed with the internal wranglings within the Tory Party”.

But, rallying troops in the final countdown to the crunch referendum, he said: “I believe 48 hours, to misquote Harold Wilson, is a very long time in politics.”

Leaving would “risk more Tory austerity”, he warned supporters.

And he hit out at Brexiteers, claiming their “divisive campaign deserves to lose”.

He added: “A vote to Leave would embolden the likes of Nigel Farage.”

 Labour In campaign chairman Alan Johnson told activists that quitting the 28-nation bloc was “not about gaining control, it’s about losing control and replacing it with turmoil and uncertainty”. 

He said: “This museum celebrates unity.

“Leaving the EU will condemn this country to the opposite as we walk off into self-inflicted isolation on our continent and in the world.”

Mr Corbyn was kicking off a day of Labour campaigning across the UK two days before polls open.

Former Labour leader Ed Miliband was due to speak in Luton before joining ex-deputy leader Harriet Harman in Birmingham, while former party boss Neil Kinnock will be in Cardiff and ex-Prime Minister Gordon Brown in Glasgow.

Mr Corbyn later spoke to school children touring the museum, and revealed it was “favourite museum in the whole country”.

He talked to them about slavery and the suffragettes, and explained the history of the museum which is built on the site of the Peterloo Massacre, when cavalry charged into a crowd of 60,000–80,000 protesters who had gathered to demand the reform of parliamentary representation in august 1819.

 EU Referendum countdown 

