EU Referendum voters brave torrential downpours, electric storms and flash floods

2016-06-23

Millions of voters braved torrential downpours, electric storms and flash flooding to cast their votes in the EU referendum.

Party officials from all sides were expecting a bumper turnout despite the extraordinary midsummer downpours, which struck large parts of the South East.

Insiders predicted the overall turnout could be above the 66.1% of eligible voters who took part in the 2015 general election – though below the record 84.6% who voted in the Scottish independence poll of 2014

That was despite several polling stations in London which flooded and had to be closed or relocated, while election officials in Merton advised voters to wear wellies on the way to the polling booth.

Mother-of-two Jodie Rose, 37, from Barking in east London, said her garden was flooded with sewage water and many local voters had been deterred from venturing out.

“My nan is 89 years of age and she’s already said that she won’t be going out to vote,” Mrs Rose said.

The 37-year-old teacher said the water was knee-deep around her grandmother’s house and that the 89-year-old would not take the “risk” of heading out to a polling station.

One polling station in Barking and Dagenham was shut because of a burst water main, while Kingston upon Thames Council in south west London was forced to move two voting locations.

Five more polling stations across London opened late due to water-logging.

And another in Dover experienced a power outage due to the storms and was running on a generator for much of the day.

Merton council tweeted a video of a waterlogged walkway outside Sacred Heart School polling station in New Malden, advising voters to “wear your wellies”.

A council spokeswoman said no one had been turned away and staff were doing everything they could to guide voters through.

At another polling station at a primary school in Newham, voters were forced to hitch up their trousers and wade through water to cast their votes.

A spokeswoman for Newham Borough Council said: “There should be no problem accessing and assistance is on hand for those needing it.”

In Huddersfield a polling station had to be temporarily closed after a man was stabbed in the street outside.

Police said the incident was not related to the EU referendum and the polling station reopened several hours later.

At another polling station in Palmers Green, north London, voters complained after finding it bedecked in England flags.

Local man Christopher Lewis said it made the place look like an “EDL rally” and described it as a “dog whistle for the Leave campaign”.

After complaints were made to the Electoral Commission the polling station was ordered to take it down.

The agency’s handbook says polling stations shouldn’t have “any badges, slogans, or colours that might bring the impartiality of the polling station staff into question must not be worn”.

In other parts of the country voting went off largely without a hitch, however.

In addition to the usual mix of primary schools, leisure centres and other council buildings, some of the more unusual locations for polling stations included pubs, farms and even a hairdresser’s.

One ‘Leave’ voter was turned away from her polling station after arriving draped in English flags, union jack specs and wearing a homemade ‘Brexit’ banner’ which read: “Vote to leave the EU. Make 23 June Independence Day”.

Teresa Hicks, 68, was sent home to change due to an election law against campaigning at a polling station.

She moaned: “I was just in the queue and this man came up to me and said ‘you are inappropriately dressed’ so I asked if they’d send somebody away with a burka on?

“I even offered to put a coat around the poster which I had around my waist but they just said ‘no’.

“I did leave but it wasn’t right. I think it’s disgusting.”

At Glastonbury festival some revellers complained they were unable to vote after learning on arrival there were no polling booths inside.

That was despite repeated warnings from festival organiser Emily Eavis that festival-goers would need to arrange postal or proxy votes.

One reveller, Holly Glazer, tweeted: “I’m effectively disenfranchised, as i can’t vote (at glastonbury and figured this out 2 hours after proxy deadline).”

Another called Charlie wrote on social media: “My sister is a politics and international relations student & she can’t vote on Thursday bcos she forgot that she would be at Glastonbury.”

Other would-be-voters expressed anger at being unable to reach their polling booths due to travel chaos caused by the floods and bad weather.

Hundreds of commuters were stuck at London Waterloo station with no way to get home because of cancelled trains and fretted they would not make it back by the 10pm cut-off.

And some Brits were unable to vote because they were trapped abroad thanks to a strike by French air traffic controllers.

Mirror reporter Jess Haworth, who was stuck on a plane at Geneva, said:

“We’ve been delayed an hour already and are delayed a further two thanks to French air traffic control strikes - looks like none of us are going to get back in time to vote.

“We’re being made to sit in our seats as an opening might come any minute!”

Another Brit, Adam, 20, Nottingham, said: “I don’t think I can vote now. We were supposed to leave at 4.50pm - 1 hour 40 mins ago.

"And we have to drive to Nottingham. So yeah we’ll probably miss it. I’m not that upset though.”

