Brexiters slammed as anti-immigration banner flown over city and Tory MP keeps campaigning despite Jo Cox tragedy

2016-06-18

Tory MP Andrew Rosindell has been slammed for campaigning for Vote Leave today, despite Remain and Brexit politicians agreeing to suspend national campaigns following the death of Jo Cox.

The pro- Brexit Conservative was labelled "disgusting" by one social media user after being seen campaigning in Romford today.

Also today, a pro-Leave, anti-immigration banner was seen being flown over Leeds.

Campaigners involved in the EU Referendum had agreed to suspend major political action until Sunday following Ms Cox's murder.

Although some local, door-to-door leafleting was expected to take place over the weekend, critics online said Mr Rosindell had gone too far.

In a video filmed by one passer-by and posted on Twitter, the MP is seen standing next to a Vote Leave banner.

He is also stood next to a vehicle which is covered in "Vote Leave" images as he talks to voters.

Social media users have expressed their shock at the images.

One branded the Tory MP "disgusting".

Despite a promise to suspend major campaigning, a Brexit plane was also seen in Harrogate carrying a political slogan.

A source has revealed the banner had been due to fly across the area on Friday but had been cancelled following the death of Ms Cox.

The source said: "The banner's flight had been cancelled on Friday out of respect for Jo Cox but was rescheduled for flight on the following day."

Opinion polls this week suggested the "Leave" camp was ahead of the "Remain" side ahead of the June 23 vote.

Mr Rosindell, the MP for Romford, retweeted touching tributes to Ms Cox yesterday.

However he is yet to reply to a backlash on Twitter following his campaigning today and has been unavailable for comment.

One local said they confronted one of the MP's fellow Vote Leave campaigners, who said it was only a bit of "light" campaigning.

They said: "When I challenged one of them about their campaign today I was told it's a 'light' campaign as its too important not to be out.

"Unfortunately most constituents who know Rosindell are not surprised by his actions and he does not represent the views or values of many of us here.

"To see an MP behaving this way only two days after the brutal murder of one of his colleagues is just awful, the worst kind of politics."

Mirror Online has approached both the MP and Vote Leave for comment.

In explaining the campaign's suspension, Will Straw, executive director of pro-Remain Britain Stronger in Europe, said in a statement: "The campaign will continue to suspend all its planned national campaign events, street stalls, and rallies tomorrow as a mark of respect for the tragic murder of Jo Cox.

"Volunteers may choose to continue door-to-door leafleting in their own local areas, but the campaign nationally will not be doing so.

"We will also be making available tribute books for volunteers and members of the public who wish to mark their respects."

Meanwhile Vote Leave said it "will be suspending major campaign events tomorrow such as the planned rally in Birmingham".

Yesterday David Cameron and Jeremy Corbyn pleaded for more "tolerance" in British society as they paid an emotional joint tribute to fallen MP Ms Cox.

The two leaders put aside party differences to stand shoulder to shoulder and lay wreaths in the centre of Birstall where their Parliamentary colleague was murdered on Thursday afternoon.

Speaking 24 hours to the minute after Labour MP Mrs Cox was pronounced dead, Mr Cameron said the nation is “rightly shocked” at the murder of a campaigning MP who “died doing her job”.

