EU Referendum: The A - Z of who wants us to Remain and who is backing Brexit

2016-06-21

On Thursday, the UK public will finally decide whether or not stay in the European Union.

The heated campaign has seen both sides accused of “nasty and dishonest campaigning” .

And voters have complained of being left confused by the politicians’ rhetoric, with claims made about immigration, the NHS, the economy and even the price of a family holiday.

But who wants us to Remain in Europe and who is backing Brexit ?

See our A to Z to find out who supports what.

Angela Merkel German Chancellor

Obviously, it is up to the citizens of the UK how they wish to vote. I’ve said repeatedly before that I personally would hope and wish for the UK to stay part and parcel of the EU.

Gordon Brown Former Prime Minister

 

My answer to the mother and father, worried about the future of their children, is that the biggest job creator over the next 10 years is going to be the single market of the EU.

We must be there.

David Cameron Prime Minister

Leaving is quitting and I don’t think we’re quitters. We’re fighters. We fight in these organisations.

Douglas Flint HSBC boss

Our strong economic view is that Britain is better within a reformed Europe.

Ed Balls Former Shadow Chancellor

What we’ve got to do is win the argument that we can have influence from within.

Paloma Faith Singer songwriter

Make sure you all register to vote to stay in the EU. COMMUNITY IS VITAL! Separatist attitudes are passé #vote

Governor of the Bank of England, Mark Carney

Brexit , to my mind, would have a material impact on growth and inflation. It would be likely to have a negative impact in the short term.

Stephen Hawking Theoretical physicist

By working together in Europe we make our economy stronger and we give ourselves more influence in the world and we provide future opportunities for young people.

IFS director Paul Johnson

I can tell you that Brexit would almost certainly make us, economically, poorer.

Jude Law Actor

 

Leaving Europe would be a leap into the unknown for millions in the creative industries, and for millions more at home and abroad who benefit from the growth and vibrancy of Britain’s cultural sector.

Keira Knightley Actor

It only takes five seconds to practise the perfect awards face. And it takes five seconds to mark an X in a ballot box.

Five seconds to stop others f****** with your future.

Christine Lagarde MD of the IMF

The UK has benefited from the many contributions of talented and hard-working migrants from all over the world, including the EU, while providing record-high levels of employment for all its residents.

Michael O'Leary Chief Executive of Ryan Air

I despise much of the regulation that comes out of Europe that add to consumer costs.

But there are sensible arguments for staying in, there are very few sensible arguments for leaving.

Bill Nighy Actor

 

Being part of the EU bolsters Britain’s leading role on the world stage.

Barack Obama President of America

A strong Europe is not a threat to Britain’s global leadership; it enhances Britain’s global leadership.

Patrick Stewart Actor

The most potent arguments, politically, economically, socially, urge us to remain.

Quorn boss Kevin Brennan

Europe is our largest export market with huge potential.

A move out of the EU would undoubtedly make expanding this business more difficult so we are strong supporters of staying in the EU.

EU Referendum countdown

Ross Kemp Actor

Why is it the Australians, the Canadians and the United States want us to remain but Mr Putin wants us to leave?

That is a good enough indication as to how he would like to diminish the security of our country.

Nicola Sturgeon First Minister of Scotland

The Leave campaign wants to focus on what we supposedly lose by being in the EU. I ask you to think more about what we have gained.

X Factor boss Simon Cowell

 

My gut feeling is I don’t think at this time you would want to be on your own on a tiny island.

Thank God it is a referendum and people will make their own minds up and won’t be listening to people like me.

Yannis Varoufakis Greek Finance Minister

The ‘Brexiters’ are quite right, there is a democratic vacuum in Europe.

But the only way of getting back your democracy is by staying in and fighting to democratise the European Union.

Zoe Gardener Communications Officer Asylum Aid

If your issue is you want no refugees in the UK, then your issue is not with the EU — it is with global law.

High-profile figures have been lining up to let everyone know why they are so keen on Britain leaving the European Union.

Here we offer you an A to Z of reasons why these people think we will be better off by going it alone. You must decide if you agree with their arguments...

Arron Banks Co-founder of Leave.EU campaign

Cameron has morphed into a blue version of Blair. If you allow unlimited immigration it affects the poorest much more than the rich.

Duncan Bannatyne Entrepreneur

 

We must leave the EU. MUST.

Sir Michael Caine Actor

You cannot be dictated to by thousands of faceless civil servants who make these rules and you sort of, ‘oh hang on a minute - is that right’ and they argue about financially but, we buy more from them than we sell to them.

Donald Trump US Presidential candidate

Maybe it’s time, especially in light of what’s happened, with the craziness that’s going on with the migration.

I think that Britain will end up separating from the EU.

Bernie Ecclestone Chief Executive of Formula One

I think Putin should be running Europe. We should get rid of Brussels and he should just be in charge.

He does what he says he’s gonna do, he gets the job done.

Nigel Farage UKIP Leader

 

I don’t believe in the flag, I don’t believe in the anthem and I don’t believe in all these presidents no one can name.

Every year a new country has an independence day. The days of big, artificial blocs are gone.

Michael Gove Lord Chancellor Justice Secretary

I think overall our national security is strengthened if we are able to make the decisions that we need and the alliances we believe in outside the current structures of the of the European Union.

Kate Hoey Labour MP

We can trade and co-operate with other countries not involved with the EU, and reach out globally.

We face a great opportunity if we leave. We can stop being Little Europeans and become internationalists again.

Sir Ian Botham Former England cricket captain

It is insane that because we are in the EU we do not have the freedom to reach our own trade agreements.

We have lost the right to govern ourselves, to make our own laws and choose who comes here.

Boris Johnson Tory MP and ex- London Mayor

 

There is no underlying loyalty to the idea of Europe.

There is no single authority that anybody respects or understands. That is causing this massive democratic void.

Katie Hopkins TV personality and newspaper columnist

There is no European Union left to leave.

Gerard Lyons Economist

The EU is like the Titanic. We could remain on the Titanic; or be like a medium-sized ship that left harbour at the same time.

The crossing may have been choppier to begin with, but it reached the new world safely.

John Mann Labour MP

The only way to take back control of our borders and introduce an Australian-style points-based immigration system is to vote to Leave on June 23.

Norman Lamont Former Chancellor

Britain has lost control of its borders. Of course, we need some immigration, skilled and unskilled, but not immigration in the hundreds of thousands.

There is no economic case for it.

Owen Paterson Conservative MP

We’ll never join the Euro, we’ll have some sort of associate status which is not yet clear – but I’m absolutely clear that we should leave the political and judicial arrangements of the EU.

Priti Patel Employment Minister

 

Emmeline Pankhurst and the suffragettes did not fight to have the right to vote on who governs them, only to then see those decisions surrendered to the EU’s undemocratic institutions.

Will Quince Conservative MP

There are big structural problems at an EU level. The EU Commission - the main EU Government - is unelected.

The Common Agricultural Policy still accounts for nearly one third of the whole EU budget.

Russian President

Vladimir Putin

 

No official statement but the Kremlin is credited with saying: “Without London sticking its nose in on strategic Russia/EU energy issues, Moscow can look to cut quiet big deals with Germany.”

Iain Duncan Smith Minister for Work and Pensions

The downward pressure on wages is a trend that will only get worse if we continue to have open borders with the EU – and would get most difficult in a recession.

Tim Martin Founder of Wetherspoons

If Britain leaves the EU, it doesn’t mean there won’t be idiots around but what I want people to do is to have the power to put people in parliament and elect politicians they want.

Union boss Mick Cash, RMT General Secretary

EU policies are at odds with the aspirations of this union, as the various treaties and directives are demanding the privatisation of our rail and ferry industries.

Theresa Villiers Transport Minister

We face a European project ever more determined to integrate, to take more powers and we could be outvoted many times over the years to come.

So there is no stable status quo for us to cling to.

John Whittingdale Minister for Media Culture and Sport

 

We’re told either you can’t do that because it’s in breach of European law or you’ve got to do that, even though you know it’s not in the interest of this country, because it’s the European directive.

Bill Dixon Haulage boss

It is business – not government – which generates wealth for the Treasury and jobs for our communities.

Outside the EU, British business will be free to grow faster, expand into new markets and create more jobs.

Brian Yeardley Haulage company boss

Year-on-year the EU buys less from Britain because its economies are stagnant.

Outside the EU, British business will be free to grow faster, expand into new markets and create more jobs.

Zac Goldsmith Conservative MP

The most important characteristic of any democracy is that it should be possible for voters to evict those who act in their name.

The EU fails on that test. Real power in Brussels rests in institutions accountable to no one.

