Tory MP and Leave campaigner accuses Remain camp of trying to profit from Jo Cox's death

2016-06-19

A Tory MP has accused the Remain campaign of trying to profit from Jo Cox's tragic death.

Andrew Murrison said on Twitter: “Remain side spinning Jo Cox murder for partisan advantage in ­#EUReferendum shameful".

Within hours the Tory had deleted the post amid fury.

It comes as shameless Nigel Farage has claimed he is the real “victim” of political hatred in Britain and said his Leave campaign lost momentum due to the murder of Jo Cox.

UKIP leader Mr Farage’s counterattack came after being slammed for his “inflammatory” language and “racist” anti-immigrant poster.

Chancellor George Osborne said the “disgusting” billboard had echoes of Nazi propaganda.

Mr Farage’s fellow Leave campaigners also distanced themselves from the “Breaking Point” poster unveiled two hours before Jo was murdered.

Vote Leave’s Michael Gove said on the BBC: “I shuddered when I saw it.”

Read more: David Cameron says 'of course' he has been contingency planning for Brexit

Labour MP Chris Bryant responded: “You can smile and sound as reasonable as you want, Mr Gove, but you are marching to the Farage drum.”

The poster has been reported to the police for allegedly inciting racial hatred, due to its apparent similarity to a 1930s Nazi anti-refugee film condemning “parasites” flooding into countries.

But asked by ITV’s Robert Peston if he was guilty of stirring up hate, Mr Farage said: “I think I’m a politician who’s been a victim of it.”

And on Sky, Mr Farage claimed people were only upset by the poster because of the death of Labour MP Jo, who backed the In campaign.

Mr Farage said: “I wish an innocent member of parliament had not been gunned down in the street, and frankly had that not happ­ened, I don’t think we’d have had the kind of row we’ve had.”

With opinion polls suggesting the Leave campaign is now losing ground, the UKIP chief said: “I think we have momentum… Er, we did have momentum, until this terrible tragedy.”

Labour MP Yvette Cooper, who was a close friend of Jo’s, said the Leave campaign’s behaviour in recent days had been “incredibly depressing”.

She said: “Nigel Farage is still trying to whip up fear and hatred towards refugees who are fleeing from conflict.

"I think it was extremely ill-judged of him to describe himself as a ‘victim’ today.”

Embarrassed Vote Leave chief Boris Johnson tried to show his campaign has a more caring side by announcing he supports an amnesty for illegal immigrants who have been in the UK for more than 12 years.

“I am not only pro-immigration, I’m pro-immigrants,” the Tory MP told a Vote Leave rally in London.

“I am in favour of an amnesty for illegal immigrants who have been here for more than 12 years, unable to contribute to this economy, unable to pay taxes, unable to take proper part in society.

“It is the humane thing to do. It is the economically rational thing do to.”

But his remarks were overshadowed by his dad, Stanley, making a speech for the Remain camp across London in Hyde Park.

 A report by Right-wing pressure group Migration Watch will admit today the  financial benefits of recent migration from the original 14 EU countries outweighs any cost incurred from the numbers arriving from Eastern Europe. 

Its report says: “Migrants from the ‘EU 14’ benefit the Treasury by between £1.5billion and £3billion a year… East European migration costs between £10million and £1.5billion.”

A second report by the academics cited by Migration Watch also said EU migrants have made a positive contribution to the UK economy.

The study found that between 1995 and 2011: “Immigrants who resided in the UK in any of these years have been generally less likely than natives to receive state benefits or tax credits and also less likely to live in social housing as natives in the same region.” 

It concluded: “Immigration to the UK since 2000 has been of substantial net fiscal benefit, with immigrants contributing more than they have received in benefits and transfers.”

Mr Farage unveiled his controversial Leave.EU poster on Thursday.

The billboard shows a mass of refugees walking through a field under the headline “Breaking Point”.

It emerged they were people on their way to a refugee camp on the border of Croatia and Slovenia – 1,000 miles from Britain.

Dave Prentis, the head of public sector union Unison, reported the poster to police, saying: “This is scaremongering in its most extreme form.”

 SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon called the poster “vile and racist”. 

But Mr Farage said it was a “complete statement of fact”.

 Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn said he has spoken to Jo’s grieving husband Brendan about politicians like Mr Farage using fear about immigration to whip up hate. 

Mr Corbyn said people’s anger should not be directed at migrants but at the Government for its austerity measures.

