Will Brexit affect your summer holidays? Here's what you need to know about passports, Euros and exchange rates

2016-06-24

Holidaymakers in their tens of thousands jet out from the United Kingdom to Europe every year.

After this morning's EU Referendum result however, many have been left with a clutch of nervous questions.

The Manchester Evening News has looked at what will happen to my passport? Will I lose out on Euros because of a poor exchange rate? What about my GB car sign?

Those in-the-know commentators have speculated in fact that nothing at all will happen for at least two years, as Britain enters into structured negotiations to leave the European Union.

But what about the future? Let's take a look...

Obviously the strength of the pound abroad will always fluctuate and there are fears that due to Brexit , it could become far weaker before it becomes stable.

The value of the British pound dropped more than six per cent against the Euro as the Brexit vote was confirmed and Prime Minister David Cameron resigned.

Anyone who bought their Euros on Wednesday and Thursday is in a better position than they would be today.

If weak Pound-Euro rates continue, our summer holiday will be more expensive.

Andrew Brown of Post Office Travel Money, which accounts for around a quarter of all UK foreign exchange transactions, today urged holidaymakers to ‘watch currency movements very carefully’.

Read more: 

Petrol and diesel prices at the pumps are also expected to creep up.

Travel organisation Abta issued a statement to say travellers due to go abroad this summer will see "little changes to their holiday".

It went on: "Once the UK formally notifies the EU of its intention to leave, the remaining member states will have up to two years to offer the UK a deal for a future trading relationship and during this period holidaymakers will not see any immediate changes.

Read more: 

"However, the fall in value of the pound will have an immediate impact on holidaymakers and their spending power overseas."

Our passports say ‘European Union’ across the top of them.

All countries issue documents with burgundy covers followed by the name of the country, its coat of arms, the word ‘passport’ and the biometric passport symbol at the bottom.

The most probable solution is that passports will continue to be valid up until their date of expiration, with non-EU passports issued thereafter.

Travel insurance products will continue to offer all of the cover that they do at the moment - there will be no immediate change to any existing policies you currently have.

There’s also a suggestion that UK holidaymakers wanting to drive in Europe might have to apply for an International Driving Permit.

And the AA said that there would be ‘no immediate effect’ on British drivers taking their car over the Channel in terms of roadside assistance on the continent.

But they warned that border controls between the UK and other European countries were ‘likely to become more onerous’, leading to the possibility of delays.

Read more: 

Brits driving abroad must display a GB sign, but the AA said it was unclear if the GB Euro-plates would still be valid within in the EU.

Millions of us rely on our European Health Insurance Card when travelling on the continent.

An up to date EHIC means you're entitled to the same level of healthcare as a resident of the European country your visiting. It's not a cover-all replacement for travel insurance should something go wrong, but it certainly helps .

So what will happen to this rather useful piece of plastic now we have voted to leave the EU?

There are fears that the only way to get care in Europe would be to take out costly private insurance following Brexit .

Read more: 

However Switzerland and Iceland are just two examples of countries outside the EU that use the EHIC scheme.

And, according to the Association of British Insurers, the card will still apply.

