The EU protects so many of our freedoms and rights - we have to Remain

2016-06-19

The EU isn’t something that’s easy to get a handle on.

For years the benefits of our membership have rolled along pretty unnoticed by us, for the most part.

We’ve felt pretty cut off from the people in our own political parties, let alone this mysterious organisation of faceless bureaucrats straightening our bananas, etc (sigh).

The paid maternity leave we now take for granted was a directive from Europe, as was the legislation on discriminating against women returning to work after having children.

The limit on working hours, the slow but gradual reduction of the gender pay gap, and the protection of women in law against domestic violence and FGM are battles being fought more effectively shoulder to shoulder with our neighbouring countries.

Read more: There can be no lasting peace in Europe unless we stay united and vote Remain

As a socialist, I have my own doubts about the distribution of member states’ wealth, which I would like to see go further, benefiting poorer members, but as one of the richer countries in the union we are no doubt benefitting from our status.

We are certainly stronger as a global force as part of Europe.

On top of this I believe being part of Europe encourages us to be more outward looking, free to travel and experience the rich diversity of our neighbouring cultures, as well as enjoying the massive investment in our own Arts and Culture here.

There are few artistic institutions that haven’t been part funded in some way by EU money.

But the biggest thing for me is the legislation laid out in the European Convention of Human Rights , which allows us many of the rights we take for granted.

EU Referendum countdown

Everything from the right to freedom of movement to the right to a fair trial, from the right to be educated to the right to fair pay, from the right not to be imprisoned without trial or to be tortured in custody to the right to freedom of expression and the right to peacefully demonstrate and be in a trade union.

There are, as we know, many countries in the world that do not afford their citizens these rights, and the fact that these things are enshrined by law means that no individual government can mess around with them to meet their own ends.

I would prefer the “faceless bureaucrats” protecting these freedoms than leaving them to the mercy of certain governments I could name.

