EU Referendum: Polling station ordered to take down England flags as it 'looked like EDL rally'

2016-06-23

A polling station was ordered to take down England flags with St George's Cross which made it "look like an EDL rally".

Voters complained that the flags - which were put up in the clubhouse for Euro 2016 - could sway people in favour of voting for Brexit .

One voter also said they feared the flags would act as a “dog whistle for the Leave campaign”.

Electoral Commission guidance clearly states polling stations "must not wear any badges, slogans or colours that might bring your impartiality into question".

Some claim hanging flags violated this guidance - others insist hanging a national flag do not.

The election watchdog said the polling station had not breached electoral law - but it had advised the venue to take the flags down to avoid confrontation.

It is understood to have wanted to stem further criticism which had erupted online when photos of Mayfield Athletic Club in Enfield, North London, emerged on Twitter earlier today.

Read more: 

Voter Christopher Lewis told The Independent the polling station "looked like an EDL rally".

He said: “There were flags everywhere.

"I asked one of the officers why there were flags and the TV on and he just looked up and my girlfriend and I and gave a sly smile and said: ‘Oh, I didn’t notice that.’

“At that point I thought they had either deliberately not taken them down or put them up so I felt obligated to take a photo.”

Taking photos at polling stations is a criminal offence if you capture a person's face - but Mr Lewis said he needed to record the scene to make a formal complaint.

“Can you imagine the outrage if they were EU flags?” he asked.

"It might affect people who are undecided – it’s a dog whistle for the Leave campaign.”

The watchdog also told the polling station to switch off the TV - which was showing rolling coverage of the EU referendum - as some also suggested it could sway voting.

An Enfield Council spokesman said the cricket club had put up the flags for Euro 2016.

It wasn't the only polling station to come in for such criticism today however.

Read more: 

Voter Carly Minsky claimed Union Flags hung at a station in Harrow was "pretty overt manipulation".

