Our great historical leaders would be stunned at what David Cameron has done

2016-06-24

 Until Friday I would have said David Cameron was one of the luckiest politicians in modern British history. But now that couldn’t be further from the truth. 

 His terrible gamble on the EU referendum has failed, the whole country has suffered, and Scotland and Northern Ireland could leave the United Kingdom. 

Cameron promised to make Britain great. But his legacy is to be the man who brought an end to Britain’s role in Europe and likely an end to Great Britain itself.

Our union with Scotland has lasted more than 300 years. Since 1707, it has survived more than 70 prime ministers, 12 monarchs and two world wars.

Our attempts to position ourselves in Europe go all the way back to Athelstan, the first king of England, in 900AD. One of our greatest ever kings, he married off his daughters to European royalty because he knew the importance of having influence in Europe. Kings, queens and prime ministers have tried to achieve the same ever since.

Elizabeth I, William Pitt, Lord Palmerston, Winston Churchill, and Margaret Thatcher – they all tried to protect our influence.

Elizabeth I even sent an army, under Dutch command, to help Holland fight a war in the 1500s. She knew it is better to give up a small amount of sovereignty to fight enemies there, to deal with problems before they hit your shores, before would-be invaders climb the White Cliffs of Dover.

So before Friday, we had the best of both worlds: the most successful union in history, and influence in Europe. Now we have thrown them both away.

What we did on Friday was as big a historical moment as they come. It’s up there with the execution of Charles I. It’s up there with the bloodiest battle in British history, the Somme. The result actually came 100 years to the day the guns first opened up on that battlefield.

Winston Churchill certainly would have called it a foolish error for us, in a fit of rage, to withdraw from one of one of the most important bodies on the planet.

What Scotland and Northern Ireland do next is massively important. Britain became the most powerful country on earth, with the best economy, and built the British Empire because we unified ourselves.

With Scotland expected to leave after its own referendum, we could go from being a major player to a little runt state.

If we become just England and Wales again, our significance will return to how we were before the Spanish Armada in 1588, on the periphery, relying on piracy to make money with no influence over our own path.

We will have consigned ourselves to irrelevance, to be blown by the winds of the rest of the world. When China, America and Russia make deals, we will have to go along.

Each of those leaders: Churchill, Elizabeth I, Palmerston, Pitt and Athelstan would be stunned at what we have done.

