Nigel Farage blames outrage over 'disgusting' poster on 'unfortunate timing' after Jo Cox murder

2016-06-20

Nigel Farage this morning blamed the outrage sparked by his 'Breaking Point' poster on "unfortunate timing", because it was unveiled two hours before Jo Cox was murdered.

He told Radio 4's Today Programme he immediately withdrew the poster.

But he said: "This poster was designed for the day. It was unfortunate timing that, within a couple of hours of releasing it, this terrible tragic murder took place."

And he later claimed to LBC Radio there was "no controversy at all" about the poster before Jo Cox was murdered, and blamed the Remain campaign for trying to conflate the "actions of one crazed individual with the motives of half of Britain."

The poster was, in fact, condemned by members of all four main political parties immediately following its release, and described as "xenophobic" and "propaganda".

The poster features a vast queue of mainly dark-skinned refugees.

In large, red letters, the poster shouts: "Breaking point". Underneath it warns "The EU has failed us all. We must break free of the EU and take back control of our borders."

But the people in the picture are, in fact, crossing into Slovenia from Croatia at the height of the migrant crisis in 2015.

The Ukip Leader claimed he'd used a similar poster ahead of the London Mayoral election "to no comment at all."

The poster unveiled by Farage in May did feature a queue of people, but they were illustrated - it was not a real photograph - and their faces were not visible.

The poster was a pastiche of the 1980s Tory poster showing a lengthy jobs queue, which said "Labour isn't working".

Ukip's poster read: "Open door immigration isn't working."

 It comes after Tory Baroness Warsi disowned the Brexit campaign, in part because of the poster, which she described as "nudge, nudge, wink, wink xenophobia and racism." 

 Last night, David Cameron said Nigel Farage was "irresponsible" to release the poster, which he said was an "attempt to frighten people." 

Mr Farage told LBC Radio: "What do you expect? It's a prime minister in trouble. We had this dreadful murder that took place last week.

"When I launched that poster, it was literally about an hour and a half before she was killed.

"When I launched the poster there was no controversy at all, in fact I'd launched a similar one before the London Assembly election just a few weeks before."

But there was significant controversy over the poster immediately following its release.

 It was described as "immoral and dishonest" by Labour's Yvette Cooper. Green MP Caroline Lucas and SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon both called it "disgusting". Lib Dem Tom Brake said it employed "fear tactics and xenophobia." 

And Tory former immigration minister Damian Green said it was "distasteful propaganda."

As the poster was unveiled and paraded around Westminster on a bus blaring out 'The Great Escape' theme, one passer by shouted "Farage! You’re a w***er!”

Among the people who responded to the poster online in the moments after it was unveiled was Brendan Cox, Jo's husband.

He described it as "vile."

Mr Farage told LBC's Nick Fararri: "This was put out and there was comment, but nothing exceptional. If the timings of the murder and me putting out that poster has upset people, I'm sorry.

"But that wasn't the intention. The intention was to use that poster for a day to point out that the EU is a failed project in every sense."

Farage also condemned the Remain campaign for: "trying to conflate the actions of one craze individual with the motives of half of Britain."

 EU Referendum countdown 

