Nigel Farage's Brexit victory speech in full

2016-06-24

 Nigel Farage has suggested that Boris Johnson, Michael Gove or Liam Fox would be potential leadership contenders for a " Brexit Prime Minister". 

 Prior to David Cameron's resignation this morning, Farage declared he believed the leader should step down as he chose not to "live up to the fray". 

In his speech, the Ukip leader also branded Cameron's behaviour during the campaign as "appalling".

 Following the victory, the British politician, who also called for June 23 to be declared a Bank Holiday, saying that it will "go down in our history as our independence day", said he believed the country needed a " Brexit Prime Minister". 

 See more: 

 Speaking prior to Cameron's resignation, Farage said: "My feeling is the Prime Minister could have risen up to the fray. He chose not to, I think he probably has to go. I think we have to have a Brexit Prime Minister." 

 "The Conservative party has literally split down the middle over this and I know a lot of Conservative MPs I've spoken to who feel that frankly the way he [David Cameron] and [George] Osborne have behaved in this campaign has been appalling. 

"They have stretched the truth, let's be nice, I could use a stronger word."

 He said Conservative backbenchers would not want "this man to stay on". 

Mr Farage also said that he hoped the win would bring down the entire "failed project" that is the EU and that old Labour voters had won the election for Leave.

 Read more: 

He added: "The election was won in my view in the Midlands and the North and it was the old Labour vote that came to us and we, particularly as a party, campaigned as hard as we could in those areas.

"There is still a massive disconnect between Westminster, SW1 and real communities."

 He said he hoped Brexit would kick start the break up of the EU. 

"Eurosceptic parties never talked about leaving the EU, now they are.

"An opinion poll in the Netherlands said that a majority there now want to leave, so we may well be close perhaps to Nexit.

"Similarly in Denmark a majority there are in favour of leaving so we could be quite close to Dexit.

 Read more: 

"And I'm told the same may apply to Sweden and perhaps Austria and perhaps even Italy too.

"The EU is failing, the EU is dying, I hope that we've got the first brick out of the wall."

