Nigel Farage claims 'ALL of the Remain camp' are 'using' Jo Cox's death for their political advantage

2016-06-20

Nigel Farage claimed "all of" the Remain camp are "using" the death of Jo Cox to their political advantage, at the same moment as grieving colleagues arrived at Westminster to pay tribute to her.

Speaking to the BBC outside the Houses of Parliament, which will see MPs remember Jo in a special session this afternoon, the Ukip leader accused David Cameron, George Osborne and every other Remain campaigner of exploiting the tragedy for their own ends.

He said: "The Remain camp are using these awful circumstances to try to say that the motives of one deranged, dangerous individual are similar to half the country, or perhaps more, who believe we should leave the EU.

“They are all talking, every single one of them, the Prime Minister, the Chancellor, they are all talking about the 'politics of hate'. There's a clear implication that somehow, a bad atmosphere has been whipped up.”

Asked whether his widely condemned 'Breaking point' poster, alongside his warnings about potential 'Cologne-style' sex attacks and violence following a Remain vote suggested "a pattern of making inflammatory remarks", he claimed he hadn't said anything about the Cologne attacks since before the campaign started.

He said: "I didn't say anything about Cologne during this referendum. I said it a long time before the campaign, actually."

This is not true.

During a referendum campaign event at the end of March, he appeared on stage in wearing a Grassroots Out branded tie, and said: "If you allow the unlimited access of huge numbers of young males into the European Continent, who come from countries where women are at best second class citizens, don't be surprised if scenes like we saw in Cologne don't happen more often."

Asked if he thought the same could happen in Britain, he told the Sunday Telegraph: "It depends on if they get EU passports. It depends if we vote for Brexit or not. It is an issue."

Earlier today, he told the BBC the only reason his poster sparked outrage was because of "unfortunate timing", because it was launched a few hours before Jo Cox was gunned down in the street.

And he claimed to LBC Radio that there was "no controversy at all" about the poster before Jo's death.

This is not true.

It was described as "immoral and dishonest" by Labour's Yvette Cooper. Green MP Caroline Lucas and SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon both called it "disgusting". Lib Dem Tom Brake said it employed "fear tactics and xenophobia."

And Tory former immigration minister Damian Green said it was "distasteful propaganda."

As the poster was unveiled and paraded around Westminster on a bus blaring out 'The Great Escape' theme, one passer by shouted "Farage! You’re a w***er!”

Among the people who responded to the poster online in the moments after it was unveiled was Brendan Cox, Jo's husband.

He described it as "vile."

EU Referendum countdown

