Brexit: Protesters march to London's Shard against 'racist rhetoric' of EU Referendum campaign

2016-06-24

Protesters are planning to march to London's Shard building to demonstrate against the 'racist' and anti-migrant rhetoric of the EU Referendum campaign.

The march, announced in a Facebook post by the Revolutionary Socialism in the 21st Century, was due travel from a park in Whitechapel to the headquarters of New Corporation next to the Shard at 6pm.

News Corporation is owned by Rupert Murdoch and publishes The Sun and Times newspapers.

The protest is being held "against racism, for migrant rights, against fascist violence – on the day after the EU referendum."

It said "the EU referendum has unleashed a torrent of racism. Migration has been attacked and scapegoated by both campaigns -- with Leave stoking up bigotry against immigrants and Remain responding by capitulating and echoing that bigotry.

"Our ruling class has opened a Pandora's box of racist rhetoric around migrants and allowed a space to open up in groups and individuals influenced by fascist ideology."

Britain voted yesterday to leave the EU after more than 40 years, causing shockwaves around the world.

Today's march is supported by, among others, by groups such as Right to Remain, Radical Assembly, Clapton Ultras, the Antiuniversity, English collective of prostitutes.

It comes after teenagers furious they'll be 'made to pay' for the Brexit decision of older voters launched a protest outside parliament.

A petition before the EU referendum called for 16 and 17-year-olds to be given the chance to shape their country's future in the In-Out vote.

The petition claimed teenagers would "be dealing with the aftermath of the referendum either way".

But the House of Commons blocked a move by the House of Lords to allowed 16 and 17-year-olds to vote.

Young people were overwhelmingly in favour of remaining in the EU according to opinion polls but a strong backing of Leave by older generations appears to have swung the vote.

The Leave campaign secured 52 per cent of the vote compared to 48 per cent for Remain.

Youngsters have now gathered outside parliament claiming they were not given the opportunity to potentially shape their own futures.

Campaigners held placards asking 'Where was my vote?' and 'Please sir, can we have a voice?'.

Meanwhile, other teenagers have taken to Twitter to voice their frustrations over not being given a say under the #notinourname hashtag

Joe Jenkins added: "Can't wait to live the rest of my life being affected by something I had no legal say in whatsoever."

@jamieppelle added: "Haven't come across a single young person supporting Brexit today. Our future should have been our decision."

According to a YouGov poll taken before the vote, 64 per cent of 18 to 24-year-old's wanted to remain in the EU.

YouGov poll

YouGov poll

In comparison, just 33 per cent of over-65s wanted to remain.

The UK was split as Scotland and Northern Ireland voted to remain but a large turnout across England secured a Brexit vote.

Many working-class Labour heartlands and traditional shire Tory voters went against party leaders and voted to leave the European Union.

The vote has triggered the shock resignation of Prime Minister David Cameron who said in a statement outside Downing Street this morning that the UK needed "fresh leadership".

