What's on the ballot paper: Mirror Politics morning briefing

2016-06-22

 Today sees the final hours of campaigning in the referendum and a day of celebrations for Jo Cox . 

The two are somehow intertwined and discordant - like forcing a string quartet to share a stage with a thrash metal band.

To mark what would have been Jo’s birthday thousands will gather in Trafalgar Square at 4pm to remember a life well lived.

There are also events in her honour in her home town of Batley and in Beirut, Brussels, Melbourne, Nairobi, New York, and Washington DC.

A moment of silence will be observed at 4.25pm.

The dignity and integrity with which Jo conducted her politics was not much on view in last night’s BBC debate.

The zoo format meant the programme was always going to be more about entertainment than enlightenment.

 You can read our verdict here . 

 The Mirror declared its allegiance this morning by coming out for Remain . 

As our editorial explains this was a difficult decision but in the end we concluded the economic consequences of leaving were not worth the gamble.

We also carry a final appeal for votes from the two Johnsons - Boris and Alan.

 You can read Boris Johnson here and Alan Johnson here . 

The final hours of campaigning will see Remain hold a cross-party rally in Birmingham at 5pm.

Nigel Farage is giving his final speech, unfortunately for the campaign, not for life, at 11am in London.

Remain’s final flourish is a letter to the Times from 1,300 business leaders warning of the economic consequences of Brexit and urging voters not to risk the jobs of their children and grandchildren.

In the end the arguments have not changed.

Voters are being asked to choose between the lure of sovereignty or economic uncertainty, between the risk of going it alone or a country that consigns itself to the margins as a weakened and impoverished nation.

That is what's on the ballot paper: prosperity, freedom, tolerance, openness, workers' rights and patriotism.

