Watch live as Barack Obama gives first media address since UK voted for historic Brexit

2016-06-24

 Barack Obama is to give his first address since Britain voted for Brexit . 

The US President will speak at the Global Entrepreneurship Summit in Palo Alto, California and you can watch it live here.

Obama has spoken briefly taoday, issuing a statement that said: “The people of the United Kingdom have spoken, and we respect their decision.

"The special relationship between the United States and the United Kingdom is enduring, and the United Kingdom’s membership in Nato remains a vital cornerstone of US foreign, security and economic policy.

“So too is our relationship with the European Union, which has done so much to promote stability, stimulate economic growth, and foster the spread of democratic values and ideals across the continent and beyond.

“The United Kingdom and the European Union will remain indispensable partners of the United States even as they begin negotiating their ongoing relationship to ensure continued stability, security and prosperity for Europe, Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the world.”

However, he has subsequently faced criticism from Donald Trump, who is in Scotland today to open his revamped gold course.

The Republican candidate claimed the President’s warning Britain would be at the “back of the queue” for trade could have swung the vote.

Trump told reporters the intervention “perhaps caused it to fail” and if he had stayed silent the result “might have been different”.

He said: “I was surprised that President Obama would be so bold to come here and tell people what to do.

“I think a lot of people don’t like him and I think if he had not said it I think you’re result might have been different.”

 He added: “He got involved, I don’t know if that was through a friendship with David Cameron . 

“It could have been. I understand friendship and I can understand why he did it, but I think it is something that he shouldn’t have done.

“It’s not his country, it’s not his part of the world.

“He shouldn’t have done it and I actually think his recommendation perhaps caused it to fail.”

 He continued: “I like David Cameron . He has had a couple of rough statements, but that’s okay, I think David Cameron’s a good man. 

“He was wrong on this. He didn’t get the mood of his country right. He was very surprised to see what happened.

“He probably did the right thing but we will see what happens.”

