Congratulations, you've taken our country back - to 1953 or 1853

2016-06-24

I spent most of Friday walking around in a daze wondering if I was having an out-of-body experience.

It was partly down to lack of sleep. But it was mostly down to the shock that millions of people I had faith in could be so naive, insular and gullible as to buy the cheap and nasty Little Britain cure-all that had been hawked by a band of dodgy, snake-oil salesmen.

It felt unreal to see Londoners yell “****” at Boris Johnson, Gary Lineker yell “****” at Nigel Farage and hear my 12-year-old daughter, close to tears, asking how long a recession lasts and if it meant she’d never get a job.

And as I watched the Prime Minister resign, the Governor of the Bank of England give a state-of-the-nation address as the Pound went through the floor, and ashen-faced politicians admit nobody knows what will happen now, I began to wonder if I’d stepped on to the set of a post-Apocalypse movie.

 Read more: Live Brexit fallout 

Because I genuinely did not expect more than half our nation to choose to walk away from our long-term allies into the arms of our new friends Vladimir Putin, Marine Le Pen and Donald Trump. Or that they would do so without an economic plan, a trading strategy, or a credible leader, making the average Briton’s future more uncertain than any time since the Blitz.

 Read more: Young people wanted Brexit the least 

All so we could tell migrant workers they are not welcome here and take our country back. To where? 1953 or 1853?

How did we get to the point where people didn’t care that the sign on the side of the bus about the EU taking £350million off us every week was a lie. Or the lie, which Nigel Farage now admits, that the money we used to send to the EU will now go to the NHS. Or that Turkey are about to join soon. Or that every warning from every financial expert should be discarded as worthless propaganda.

How did we allow the comfortable baby-boomer generation to jeopardise the future of our already debt-ridden young people (75% of whom voted to stay in Europe) through some misguided belief that by voting Brexit their home towns would return to the same ethnic mix they had when they were growing up?

I’ll tell you how. By too many people ignoring the facts and willingly buying into the divisive vision of a man who has built a political career whipping up hatred for foreigners.

A public school-educated stockbroker, who wants to shrink the state and let the markets rip, who reinvented himself as a man of the people and convinced millions of disillusioned working-class voters he was on a mission to smash the rich elite he belonged to.

The hypocrite who repeatedly peddled the lie that there are 26 million unemployed Europeans eyeing up every British job vacancy, while giving his taxpayer-funded secretary’s job to his German wife.

Fair play, Nigel Farage. You did us all up like a Ukipper.

But let’s not give him all the credit. He’s simply part of a three-card trick that has been played on the British people. The biggest con in the history of British voting.

Farage may have built the good ship Brexit but two equally slippery, right-wing, ex-public schoolboys launched it into S**t Creek and took away the paddles.

When historians get to write the truth about this completely unnecessary referendum they won’t say it was a vote demanded by the British people to decide their national destiny. They will say it was the final battle in a decades-long Tory Civil War, at the heart of which was a fight to the death between two Old Etonians, David Cameron and Boris Johnson, for the hollow crown. A sort of Eton Wall Game. Where the poorest are put up against the wall and shot.

If we can take any solace, it’s that Cameron’s legacy is in tatters. The man who so narrowly avoided killing the UK by fobbing the Scots off with a referendum, has now killed our 43-year successful union with Europe.

And all because he needed a way to shore up the defections to UKIP from the right-wing of his party. And the ultra-confident, super-arrogant PR man thought he had the skills to pull it off. That he could charm the Europeans into meaningful concessions which would buy off the anti-EU voters at home. But he miscalculated on a criminal scale. 

How do you reduce the most complex of constitutional and economic matters to a single Yes/No answer? How do you not see, after the near-miss in Scotland, that many voters use such votes as a chance to lump all their fears and problems into one box, and kick all politicians hard. Especially when it was always going to be turned into a referendum on whether or not Britain is “full”.

His performance throughout the campaign was lamentable, the Eurosceptic’s lack of passion as obvious as his lack of credibility. You don’t go from promising a referendum at a General Election to telling people if they vote one way it might lead to World War III.

As for Johnson, he deserves the anger and shame that awaits him for leading a Brexit campaign he never believed in, purely because he saw it as his way of taking the top job of his Old Etonian foe. In that sense he is the most cynical and dishonest of them all.

Hours before the campaign ended, he confessed to having written two different Daily Telegraph newspaper columns, one fervently backing Remain, the other Brexit, before deciding to take on Cameron as leader of the Outters. 

Those who read it said the case he made for staying was far more persuasive than the one for leaving. Which is chilling.

To be fair, I’m the same whenever I do a column on Johnson. I write one which says he’s a blindly ambitious parasite, and another which says he’s a disloyal, patronising, chameleon. And I toss a coin to decide which one to use.

But this time I’ll use both. Because those of you who voted for the cause Johnson doesn’t truly believe in need to know everything about the future Prime Minister you have so wisely foisted on the nation.

Still at least with Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson in charge you’ve got your country back from that insidious, self-serving elite, eh?

