Money Saving Expert Martin Lewis: How to vote in the EU referendum

2016-06-22

It’s the biggest consumer decision any of us will ever make.

It affects our economy, foreign policy, immigration policy, security and sovereignty.

Our vote on whether the UK should leave the EU will reverberate through our lifetimes, and those of our children and grandchildren.

If you’ve already made up your mind how to vote, good. I’m not campaigning – I don’t want to change it.

If you haven’t, my aim is to help you ignore the spin and sales to weigh up the right decision for you, your community, our nation and the wider world too.

My mailbag’s been drowning with questions. The biggest being: Please just tell us the facts, what’ll happen if we leave?

I’m sorry, but actually there are no facts about what happens next.

Anyone who tells you they KNOW what’ll happen if we leave the EU is a liar.

Predicting exact numbers for economic, immigration or house price change is nonsense.

What’s proposed is unprecedented. All the studies, models and hypotheses are based on assumptions – that’s guesstimate and hope.

So accept the need to wrestle with uncertainty.

Read more: The 6 experts saying Brexit will cost you - and the 1 that disagrees

The EU referendum is far from a black and white issue; there are more shades of grey than E L James’s bookshelf.

Most politicians try to come across as doubt-free. Yet like life, it’s a mix, and it’d be better if both sides admitted that.

So how do you square this and the myriad of other issues? For most people this comes down to doing a risk assessment.

A vote for Brexit is unquestionably economically riskier than a vote to remain.

Yet don’t automatically read risk as a bad thing.

It simply means there’s more uncertainty – a greater variance of possible outcomes.

Much of the debate stems around ‘free trade’ issues – which in simple terms mean no tariffs or taxes on imports or exports between countries.

Leaving the EU risks us being left on the side-lines.

A shrinking power, spurned after a bitter divorce from our neighbours, who, wanting to discourage other leavers, offer us hideous trading conditions, while the rest of the world sees us as too small to bother with.

Or we could in the long run become a nimble low-tax, low-regulation, tiger economy.

Trading unfettered with all nations across the globe, able to create our own rules and speedily reacting as a niche player to a changing world.

The likely truth is of course somewhere between the two.

But most independent analysis suggests Brexit will be detrimental to the economy, and on balance I think a wobble of economic uncertainty is more likely, at least in the short to medium term.

Read more: Will Brexit send the pound crashing?

Though again, it’s about chance, so it doesn’t mean it’s definite, and of course money isn’t the sole issue.

A vote IN has a level of uncertainty too. The future is always a journey, and the economies and politics of some EU countries are far from stable.

But overall less change is likely.

So if you’re thinking you don’t want to take the risk the economy could go bad, vote IN.

If you’re thinking things are so poor already, you’re willing to take the chance it could get worse, in the hope it could get better, vote OUT.

I’ve focused financially as it’s more my area. But similarly you can do a risk analysis on most issues.

Take those who see EU freedom of movement as a bad. Brexit will leave the UK free to create its own immigration policy. Yet anything is possible.

There’s a risk, that, say, French and German leaders could demand freedom of movement as a condition of a future free trade agreement with the single market which if agreed, would see us in a similar boat as now, but without our seat at the EU top table.

Read more: How will Brexit affect UK benefits

EU fees have become a hot potato politically, but it’s worth establishing the scale of the debate.

So while fees for the EU club are huge, they’re dwarfed by the scale of our economy.

That doesn’t diminish them as a political issue, but it does mean they can’t be viewed in isolation.

Just a 1% economic change is £18 billion a year. The IN campaign’s worst case figure says Brexit could cost 7.5%, so that’s £135 billion.

Some OUT economists say the gain could be 4%, so £72 billion. Regardless of which is right, it shows how you think the nation’s finances will swing should outweigh your view on fees.

The only way to make the right decision is based on your political attitude to the EU, your gut instinct, and how risk-averse you are each area that matters to you.

I hope this article has helped at least put it in context.

Yet frustratingly, we’ll never know the right answer, as we can only ever know how one outcome turns out.

Sadly that means the spittle and bitterness over this will rage on long beyond 23 June.

And indeed that’s where I should finish this, but…

A couple of weeks ago I was so stunned I dropped my wallet (you can imagine how tightly I cling to that) when a Stronger In Europe leaflet popped through my door with my face and quote at the top.

I hadn’t been asked for permission, nor am I campaigning for either side (see the truth about the leaflet blog).

The quote was accurate. It came from ITV’s The Agenda where I was put on the spot with a direct question.

I’m not a politician, so I answered, saying: “On balance of probability, it is more likely we’ll have less money in our pockets if we vote to leave”.

On its own, especially as I cautioned it was a fine call, it isn’t a glowing endorsement.

However, in the context of the leaflet it seems more.

Indeed ever since a November poll petrifyingly said I’m the UK’s most-trusted person on the EU vote, even some of my minor utterances have been picked up.

Including when asked directly how I was likely to vote.

My concern is, having tried to present arguments from both sides – I don’t want anyone to read this and feel later I’d hidden something that is out there.

I’m generally risk-averse, and that pushes me just towards an IN vote for safety, maybe 55% to 45%.

Yet just as my dream holiday isn’t necessarily yours, no more is my choice of what’s right a call for you to follow me.

Far better is follow the logic above.

Martin Lewis, broadcaster and financial journalist, is the founder of the UK’s biggest consumer website MoneySavingExpert.com.

This article’s extracted from his full ‘In or out?’ guide at www.moneysavingexpert.com/EU.

