As Britain is divided in EU Referendum aftermath political leaders call for unity

2016-06-23

Leaders of all the main parties will call for unity as Britain wakes up to a divided nation.

 With the result of the referendum on a knife-edge, David Cameron is planning to address the country from the steps of Downing Street this morning and urge the country to accept the outcome. 

Remain campaigners are “quietly optimistic” the historic vote is swinging their way.

A flurry of final polls all pointed to Britain wanting to stay in the European Union.

A survey by Populus for the Financial Times carried out on Tuesday and Wednesday had EuRemain at 55% and Leave 45%.

An Ipsos Mori poll for the Evening Standard put the race a bit closer with 52% for staying in and 48% wanting out.

The markets also surged across the globe at the prospect of the UK staying in the European Union.

Ipsos Mori poll for the Evening Standard p

More than £220billion has been added to the value of the world’s 3,000 biggest firms, pushing the UK’s FTSE 100 up 33 points to 6,294 by mid-afternoon.

 But the Leave camp was given an eleventh hour boost with the higher than expected turnout, especially in the north of England, which could indicate that people who sat on their hands at the last general election had been spurred to vote for Brexit. 

A senior Downing Street source said the PM, regardless of the outcome, would make an address from No 10.

“His tone will be conciliatory. Either way he will want to say that unity is now important,” the source said.

 Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn is planning to issue a similar message once the outcome is known. 

Speaking before the polls closed, he told the Mirror: “Whatever the result, it is clear that the British people have not voted for the status quo.

“Political leaders must accept the decision of the people. We also have to acknowledge the huge dissatisfaction expressed by millions of voters.

“We now need to bring people together after the divisions exposed in the past few months - and push ahead with the demands for reform, in Britain and Europe, that Labour set out during the campaign.”

Lib Dem leader Tim Farron will use a speech at lunchtime on Friday to “frame the peace.”

He will say the country needs to learn the lessons of the referendum and respond to the anger expressed by voters.

A tight-lipped Mr Cameron cast his vote with his wife Samantha at Methodist Hall in Westminster.

Mr Corbyn was more positive when he voted in his Islington constituency in north London.

Asked if he was feeing confident, Mr Corbyn replied: “Extremely, it’s a very good day.”

He added: “You could either check the wind or check the bookies,. The bookies usually get it right”.

The bookmakers had odds of 7/1 of a Remain win.

Justice Secretary Michael Gove said he was feeling “quite excited” as he accompanied his wife, Sarah Vine, to a polling station in North Kensington.

Ukip leader Nigel Farage insisted his side could pull off an historic victory. “I do think we are in with a very strong chance, I do genuinely,” he said.

The bitter campaign has exposed deep fault lines in the UK, dividing families, communities and regions.

Big urban areas such as London and Edinburgh are firmly for remain, while rural areas and old industrial parts of Britain have shifted towards leave.

The Leave campaign was accused of fuelling the divisions by sending out a polling day message urging people to stop London and Scotland, both remain heartlands, from dictating the outcome.

The email read: “There is a very real chance that voters in London and Scotland will vote to keep us in the EU today despite the heartlands of the country voting to leave. We need your help to stop this from happening.”

Chuka Umunna, the pro-Remain Labour MP for Streatham, said: “Vote Leave are ending this campaign as they began it – by seeking to divide our country not unite it, turning regions, nations and communities against one another.

“Londoners and Scots have as much right to exercise their democratic choice as anyone else. Implying that our votes are somehow less legitimate than those cast in other parts of Britain is utterly disgraceful.

“The choice is as clear as ever. There are just hours left until the polls close.

"Today, reject division and vote Remain for a united, tolerant, decent Great Britain.”

Mr Cameron is drawing up plans for a ‘unity reshuffle’ to heal the wounds of the referendum.

Allies of the Prime Minister say he has no intention of stepping down if the country votes leave and will stay to steady the ship.

Supportive ministers will tour the broadcasting studios as the results come through as part of a “save Dave’ operation.

If the result is to remain, then the PM will try to bring the Conservatives together by promoting Brexit campaigners to senior ministerial posts.

This could see Boris Johnson given a Cabinet post and a possible promotion for Michael Gove.

There is a question mark over whether Mr Gove, the Justice Secretary, will want to stay in post following the referendum, which saw him take the opposite side to his friends George Osborne and Mr Cameron.

Mr Johnson is expected to be offered a high-profile post.

Friends of the former London Mayor say he is interested in Defence or Communities and Local Government.

Downing Street is also mulling over bringing Liam Fox, the Eurosceptic former Defence Secretary, back to the Cabinet in another olive branch to the Leave camp.

But other prominent Brexit-backing Tories face being punished.

Defence minister Penny Mordaunt angered the Prime Minister with her personal attacks on him.

Others Leave supporters facing the axe include Culture Secretary John Whittingdale and Northern Ireland Secretary Theresa Villiers.

Insiders say the timing of the reshuffle will depend on the scale of the result.

If Remain win comfortably then Mr Cameron will want to move quickly to consolidate his position.

If it is narrow victory then he may delay the shake up for several months, using the uncertainty to bind MPs’ loyalty and stop them siding with Eurosceptic plotters who want to see Mr Cameron out.

