Boris Johnson's Brexit speech in full as he praises 'extraordinary' David Cameron

2016-06-24

Boris Johnson has paid tribute to David Cameron after the Prime Minister stepped down in the wake of today's EU referendum result – but failed to mention his own potential leadership bid.

The Brexit supporter said Mr Cameron is "one of the most extraordinary politicians of our age" and praised his "bravery" for supporting the referendum vote.

After eight years as mayor of London, Boris has frequently been tipped as the next leader of the Tory party and is the bookies' favourite to succeed Mr Cameron. 

He led one of the official campaigns for Brexit and his political ambitions will have been buoyed by the public's decision to vote leave.

Speaking alongside fellow Brexit campaigners Gisela Stuart and Michael Gove, Johnson said: "Some people are now saying that was wrong and that the people should never have been asked in this way. I disagree.

"I believe it was entirely right and inevitable and indeed that there is no way with dealing with a decision on this scale except by putting it to the people.

"In the end, this question is about the people, it’s about the right of the people of this country to settle their own destiny, it’s about the very principles of our democracy.

"The rights of all of us to elect and remove the people who make the key decisions in their lives. And I think that the electorate have searched in their hearts and answered as honestly as they can

Earlier, Johnson was protected by police as he was bundled into a blacked-out people carrier.

Reporters had been expecting some triumphant words from the Leave campaign's most high-profile figure but Boris dashed from his front door and into the car before driving off.

A large crowd audibly booed before shouting "scum" and "traitor" at the former Mayor of London and banging on the windows of his car as he sped away.

Just yards down the road his vehicle was then blocked in by dozens of cyclists who continued to taunt the 52-year-old.

Earlier this week he told The Telegraph: “Frankly, if this is the end of my political career … I’ve done eight years as mayor of London, I enjoyed it hugely, it was a massive privilege. Fine by me." 

In March a poll revealed that Boris was the clear favourite to take over from Cameron among both the public and Tory supporters.

The nation is waking up to the shock Brexit vote after the Leave campaign secured as 52 per cent vote against the predictions of pollsters and political experts.

The UK was split as Scotland and Northern Ireland voted to remain but a large turnout across England secured a Brexit vote.

Many working-class Labour heartlands and traditional shire Tory voters went against party leaders and voted to leave the European Union.

The vote has triggered the shock resignation of Prime Minister David Cameron who said in a statement outside Downing Street this morning that the UK needed "fresh leadership".

He said: "The British people have voted to leave the European Union and their will must be respected.

"The country requires fresh leadership to take it in this direction," added the PM.

Read more: 

"I will do everything I can as Prime Minister to steady the ship over the coming weeks and months, but I don't think it would be right for me to try to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination.

"This is not a decision I've taken lightly but I do believe it's in the national interest to have a period of stability and then the new leadership required."

Cameron said he would remain in his post for a few more months to "steady the ship" until a successor can take over and lead Britain's negotiations with the E.U. on the specifics of its exit from the 28-nation trading bloc.

He said he expected a new prime minister to be in place by October.

A Scottish piper stuck two fingers up to Boris with an early morning wake up call on the day he led campaign which took Britain out of the EU.

The bag pipe player serenaded his north London townhouse with Scotland the Brave as he slept shortly after 6.30am following the momentous night for Britain.

The wannabe Prime Minster had reportedly been up until 5am before going to sleep before he planned to attend a Brexit victory event today.

The whole of Scotland voted to Remain as voters in England and Wales were persuaded by Boris's Brexit warnings about immigration and an expending European superstate

The piper - sent by the Mirror's sister paper in Scotland the Daily Record - also belted out a cheeky rendition of the German national anthem as well as Flower of Scotland.

The decision to leave the EU after 43 years sparked fears for the breakup of Britain and triggered a sterling collapse.

Nicola Sturgeon said Scotland's future "lies in the EU" and in Northern Ireland Sinn Fein called for a vote on a united Ireland.

