Break up of UK moves step closer as Nicola Sturgeon paves way for SECOND Scottish referendum

2016-06-24

The break-up of the United Kingdom is a step closer after Nicola Sturgeon paved the way for a second referendum on ­Scottish independence.

 The First Minister said her country’s overwhelming support for staying in the EU gave her a mandate to hold a fresh poll on Scotland’s future. 

The result also sent shockwaves through Northern Ireland, which as expected voted strongly for Remain.

Ms Sturgeon said a second vote on Scottish independence was now “highly likely” after 62% of Scots put themselves at odds with England and Wales by backing Remain.

She said: “As things stand, Scotland faces the prospect of being taken out of the EU against our will. I regard that as democratically unacceptable.”

Ms Sturgeon said she was re-elected in May on a manifesto that the country should have the right to another ­referendum following a “significant or material” change in circumstances such as Scotland being forced to leave the EU against its wishes.

The First Minister added: “It is, therefore, a statement of the obvious that a second referendum must be on the table, and it is on the table.

“If Parliament judges that a second referendum is the best or only way to protect our place in Europe, it must have the option to hold one within that timescale. That means we must act now to protect that position.

“I can therefore confirm, we will begin to prepare the legislation that will be required to enable a new independence referendum to take place.”

 In 2014, Scotland voted by 55% to 44% against going it alone. But Ms Sturgeon said the EU referendum result fundamentally changed the terms of the settlement. She went on: “There are many people who voted against independence in 2014 who are today reassessing their decision. 

“Indeed, a very large number of them have contacted me already.”

 However lead Brexit campaigner Boris Johnson tried to calm fears, claiming in a press conference with Justice Secretary Michael Gove: “To those who may be anxious, at home or abroad, this does not mean that the United Kingdom will be in any way less united, nor indeed does it mean that it will be any less European.” 

But Former Labour First Minister Henry McLeish agreed the debate on Scotland’s future had “massively changed overnight”.

He added: “The issue is we have now left the EU and Scots have to make a decision on where they think their true interests lie. I have great difficulty, great political difficulty and personal ­difficulty, being part of the UK that is no longer a part of the EU.”

Celebrities also voiced doubt. Pro-Remain author JK Rowling had backed staying in the UK in 2014.

But the Harry Potter writer, who lives in Scotland, tweeted: “Many No voters will think again now.”

Meanwhile Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson dismissed calls for an independence referendum.

She said: “We do not address the challenges of leaving the EU by leaving our own Union of nations, our biggest market and our closest friends.”

 Ms Sturgeon went on to suggest there was “common cause” with London Mayor Sadiq Khan for the UK to stay in the single market. 

A spokesman for Mr Khan said it was “absolutely key” that there remained access to the single market.

And with Labour MPs warning they too will insist on staying in the single market, there is a possibility of a ­constitutional crisis if it is pushed to a Commons vote.

 The Leave campaign was also warned during the campaign that Brexit could have significant consequences for the United Kingdom and Northern Ireland peace process. 

 Former Prime Ministers Sir John Major and Tony Blair last week said in the even of an out vote “the most successful union in world history would be broken apart for good”. 

 Brexit could see Northern Ireland introduce controls on the border with the Republic – the only part of the United Kingdom to share a land border with another EU member state. 

With Northern Ireland voting by 56% to 44% to Remain, Sinn Fein – which shares power in the Northern Ireland Executive – said the referendum result should trigger a poll of the areas either side of the border.

Deputy First Minister Martin McGuinness insisted the people of Northern Ireland must now have a say.

The Sinn Fein veteran added he would seek “urgent” talks with the Irish and Scottish governments and EU institutions on “how we move forward in the best interests of all of our people”.

He said: “The people of the north of Ireland – nationalists, republicans, unionists and others – have made it clear they wish to remain in the EU.

“The British Government now need to take account of that and recognise that reality and allow the people of the north to have their say on their future.

“Dragging us out of Europe will be to the detriment of all our citizens and will be bad for business, trade, investment and wider society.”

Theresa Villiers, the Tories’ Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, said she did not believe the criteria for triggering a border poll had been met.

