Stock market trading could be suspended within hours of a Brexit vote hints George Osborne

2016-06-20

George Osborne has refused to rule out the stock market being suspended within hours of a Brexit vote.

The Chancellor made his warning tonight as he claimed firms would start rolling out redundancies "very quickly" if Britain decides to leave.

He told LBC: "It would start to come this Friday. That's when the uncertainty would start, questions about our trading relationship.

"I think on Friday morning you'll see the first reaction will be in the financial markets, because they've placed all these bets that they will move money out of Britain if Britain votes to leave."

Asked if trading on the FTSE 100 would have to be suspended to avoid a crash, he said: "We have of course discussed contingency plans but the sensible thing is to keep those secret."

Mr Osborne said the Treasury and Bank of England had made backup plans to avoid a short-term financial shock if the Leave campaign triumphs.

Read more:  

But he insisted the government still has no long-term Plan B.

He said: "I'm afraid that is the reality Britain would face. Britain does not have a plan for Brexit."

During a wide-ranging interview the Tory minister also claimed "our enemies in the world want us to leave. President Putin has given as much as a nod and a wink".

And he said: "You can't tow this country off into the middle of the Atlantic. We are part of the European continent, we always have been, we always will be."

He was accused by LBC host Iain Dale of drawing up his post-Brexit budget plans "on the back of a fag packet".

But he said if there is a Brexit "there would be an immediate question mark over the state of our public finances. It wouldn't just be when we left in two years' time that the economic hit would come."

He added: "If the country votes to Remain on Thursday, we're going to wake up on Friday and this huge issue that's dogged Britain for years and years will have been resolved.

"The uncertainty will lift, the investment will flow in, the jobs will be created."

