I want my country back from the liars who are fanatical about trying to drag us out of Europe

2016-06-19

I want my country back from liars who are happily sacrificing the truth in their fanatical ideological obsession with dragging Britain out of Europe .

I want my country back from conmen prepared to destroy other families’ jobs and livelihoods to create a treasure island this side of the Channel for tax-dodging spivs and speculators.

I want my country back from preachers of hate inciting angry mobs against hard-working, demonised newcomers from other lands.

And I want my country back from political assassins who cut down their opponents in the streets.

The Britain I love and will vote for on Thursday is the easy-going, tolerant, neighbourly nation lost during a poisonous referendum.

Britain is also grotesquely unfair economically when five rich families own as much as 12 million citizens.

When one-in-five households struggle to put food on the table. And when your chances in life owe more to the luck of birth than talent.

But these are obscenities made in Britain, not Brussels.

Read more: Arguments for and against Brexit as campaigners fight for Remain and Leave

Unchecked by our European partners, the shape-changing New Right advocating withdrawal would unleash fresh miseries and inequalities on working families.

Tory chameleons Boris Johnson and Michael Gove would swiftly change back from red to blue on Friday morning should Project Fibs deliver a Leave vote.

They’d steal our job rights and lock the NHS in a care home for terminally ill public services.

Since the Leavers lost the economic argument, UKIP extremist Nigel Farage has called the racist tune with Johnson and Gove joining in by clodhopping on communities.

Facts go out of the window when this vile group is too cowardly, too deceitful to admit it possesses no credible answer to the migration fears it so recklessly stokes.

Immigration into Britain? They don’t admit it’s higher from outside the European Union than within.

Copy Norway? Immigration is higher per head than in Britain.

EU Referendum countdown

Or adopt the Australian points system? The numbers entering Oz are proportionately double and fewer than one in five are on points.

Every slogan paraded by Brexiteers crumbles under a moment’s scrutiny.

Britain is no longer a sovereign nation? What’s more sovereign than a Britain voting to stay or go?

I acknowledge the EU isn’t perfect. But alternatives sketched by Leavers are fantasies – hucksters offering the Moon when the only jobs they guarantee are their own.

I was cautiously optimistic Remain would win before the slaughter of Labour MP Jo Cox, a vocal Remain campaigner, saw a shocked country stop and ask where the vile preachers of political hate were taking us.

Remain and fight to reform the EU is best for Britons and Britain. So that’s what I’ll vote on June 23.

I hope you do too.

