You've gambled with my generation's future - we have the right to be angry

2016-06-24

I went to bed on Thursday night feeling quietly confident Remain had it in the bag. I reassured friends, "It won't happen, don't worry, it's close but Remain has this."

 But when I woke up this morning to the news Britain had voted to back Brexit , I felt such an overwhelming sadness. 

I was always going to vote Remain. Months of toxic debate from both sides didn't affect the way I was going to vote.

Now the damage has been done and it is the younger generation who will pay the price.

Three quarters of 18-24-year-olds voted to remain in the European Union (YouGov) compared to 39 per cent of over 65s, but young people's voices have been ignored.

It is, frankly, nothing short of a betrayal.

And 16 and 17-year-olds weren't even given a say in this referendum - who was voting for them?

My social media is a sea of devastated friends lamenting this decision and I am yet to see anyone my age celebrating Brexit.

The fact that some Leave voters are even saying they 'didn't realise' their vote would count is just another slap in the face. To us their vote counted for so much.

Remain patronised us with their 'Ravin, Chattin, Roamin' campaign but we still backed it.

We backed it because most of us can't fathom why cutting ourselves off from the EU would be a good idea.

We backed it because many of us know leaving the EU won't solve immigration problems.

We backed it because we love being a part of something that allows us to travel and work freely between 27 countries and the possibilities that brings us.

We backed it because even though we know it is far from perfect, the alternative of staring into the abyss is far worse.

It is so baffling to young people that the older generations, some of whom lived through the devastation of war in Europe, have now turned their back on unity in favour of isolation and division.

Baby boomers have enjoyed the luxury of free higher education, cheaper housing, better pensions, while we are saddled with debt and uncertainty for the rest of our lives.

We are Generation Rent, we are the ones who will be struggling to find homes and jobs.

We have every right to be angry at the outcome of this referendum because our future has just been gambled with.

The older generation has taken us a huge - irreversible - step back into the dark.

The scary thing is that no one really knows what will happen next.

But what we do know is that it's going to be the younger generation who pick up the pieces of this referendum.

