Nigel Farage blames Britain's youth for Brexit 'defeat' as he says he's NOT conceding - but probably lost

2016-06-23

 Bitter Nigel Farage has blamed Britain's youth for his Brexit 'defeat' - saying the 48-hour extension of the registration deadline probably 'tipped the balance'. 

Speaking at tonight's Leave.EU party after polls closed in the EU referendum, the stony-faced UKIP leader stepped back from his earlier almost-concession, where he said “Remain will edge it” an hour previously.

But the Ukip leader also admitted he’s probably lost.

And he blamed young voters who signed up at the last minute - including those who registered after the deadline was extended by 48 hours because the system crashed.

He told revellers: “I hope and pray my sense of this tonight is wrong.

“My sense of this - no I’m not conceding - but my sense of this is the government’s registration scheme, getting 2million voters on, the 48 hour extension, may be what tips the balance.

“I hope I’m wrong. I hope I’m made a fool of, believing that to be a case.”

"Either way, whether I am right or wrong, if we do stay part of this European Union, it is doomed."

He said the biggest change was not in Britain but the way other countries were starting to doubt the EU.

Mr Farage added: "Win or lose this battle, we will win this war. We will get this country back, we will get our independence back and we will get our borders back."

Mr Farage added: “I want to say a massive thanks to every single voter today who had the guts to defy their party political leaders, to defy the establishment, to defy the big boys.

“I don’t think there’s ever been a campaign where ordinary folk have been subjected to so many threats.

“Whoever wins this battle, one thing I’m absolutely certain of is we are winning this war.”

He said euroscepticism was previously derided as “fruitcakey” and is now supported by nearly half the country - possibly more than half. (But probably not).

“The Eurosceptic genie is out of the bottle,” he added, also claiming rising doubts about EU membership in other member countries.

Social media predicted Farage's frustration at being defeated by the youth vote earlier on in the evening, with one user tweeting an image of Scooby Doo, with the quote: "We would have gotten away with it if it weren't for those meddling kids!"

