Top Gear's Matt LeBlanc makes viewers laugh with Brexit joke sparking hopes the show could survive

2016-06-19

Top Gear is a hit! Or at least one joke on the show was on Sunday night's episode.

 Co-host and former Friends actor Matt LeBlanc amused viewers as he introduced The Stig with a series of increasingly bizarre claims, as is usual, but this week a crack about Brexit left viewers in stitches. 

 He said, while introducing the anonymous racing driver's turn in an Aston Martin Vulcan: "Some say he thinks Brexit is a laxative. And for tax purposes is classified as a biscuit." 

Fortunately for host Chris Evans and the much-criticised show, the joke went over well and viewers flocked to social media to gush about it.

 " Brexit is a laxative! The best line on Top Gear so far!" tweeted one fan while another added: "Quote of the week!" 

It comes after it was claimed the show was at risk of being axed.

According to bookmakers Betway, the long-running BBC motoring series may get scrapped as ratings continue to fall.

 Since its launch four weeks ago, the revamped show - which is hosted by Chris Evans and Matt LeBlanc - has been failing to attract the same number of viewers as it has done in previous years, when Jeremy Clarkson, Richard Hammond and James May were presenters. 

Now, Betway are as sure as 5/6 that the next episode episode on Sunday will receive its lowest ratings yet, with less than 2.4 million viewers.

Last week's show proved so unpopular that that BBC One’s Wednesday re-run of Mrs Brown’s Boys pulled in a bigger audience.

And it only looks set to get worse if these stats are anything to go by.

 READ MORE: Chris Evans has Top Gear air time 'cut in half' as Rory Reid and Chris Harris step forward 

The bookmaker quotes 5/4 for BBC to put the brakes on another series and thinks co-presenter Matt LeBlanc’s chances of presenting season 24 are in the balance at 2/1.

But the wheels haven’t totally fallen off yet, though. The firm are offering short odds of 4/7 for the show to be back with another series with Chris to return as host.

"With dwindling audience figures, the future of Top Gear could be hanging in the balance," Betway’s Alan Alger told Mirror Online. "Germany v Ukraine pulled in a significant portion of the TV audience last weekend and, at 5/6 for Top Gear’s viewing figures to slide again, the betting indicates that the motoring show is likely to lose out to France v Switzerland this Sunday."

Mirror Online has contacted Top Gear for comment.

