Thomson launch cheapest flights to Spain at £30 RETURN - but are you safe to book before the EU referendum results?

2016-06-23

The battle of the airlines in the run up to the EU referendum has seen Ryanair launch bargain flights across Europe for those leaning towards the 'In' vote, and easyJet claiming that Brexit could result in a flights price hike.

But, in the seven-day countdown to today's big vote, eagle-eyed travellers will have also spotted some amazing holiday deals as British Airways, Flybe and Monarch crash prices Europe-wide - from £24.99 one-way.

Winning the bargain flights bonanza is Thomson Holidays, which this week launched the cheapest return flights of the year to Spain at £29 return - that's one-way tickets under £15. See the full sale line up here .

There's just under 50,000 seats up for grabs, with flights departing across the UK, including all London airports, East Midlands, Norwich, Leeds, Bristol and Cardiff.

The cheapest flights are to Palma de Mallorca in Spain - with 14,000 flights down to £29. Splash out an extra £6, and you can travel to the Costa Del Sol (Malaga), Ibiza or Menorca.

Or, spend between £39 and £45 and you'll bag return flights to Alicante, Portugal, Venice, or Dubrovnik in Croatia. Flight dates are spread out across the next six weeks - and yes, many of the cheap flights are valid over the school summer break.

If you want to take advantage of cheap flights before the EU referendum outcome tomorrow, you can do so safely.

If a vote to leave wins, Brexit would still take two years to implement, meaning any tickets booked in the short term wouldn't be affected - and you won't need a visa to visit Europe.

According to a study conducted by travel insurance firm Holiday Safe , 33% of UK travellers say that ease of travel in the EU has a bearing on how they will vote in the EU Referendum.

Leading low cost airlines easyJet and Ryanair say their budget flights to Europe is owed a lot to the EU liberalising the skies.

EasyJet founder Sir Stelios Haji-Ioannou has warned that a Leave vote may lead to more restrictions on airlines, which would reduce competition. And if competition is reduced, fares could increase.

He said: "It is certainly not my place to tell people how to vote, but it is very possible that - in a post- Brexit Europe - a more restrictive aviation environment would mean fewer flights from the UK to Europe and hence less competition between airlines.

"That in turn would mean higher air fares so that the price of a family holiday to the Med will go back up again to levels last seen in the 1980s."

But, the latest airline to buck the bargain flights trend, Norwegian , is evidence that competitors from outside the EU can still offer cheap fares.

Daily Mirror Travel Editor, Nigel Thompson explains: "The only impact Brexit would have immediately would be if the pound collapsed and travellers get a poor Euro exchange rate.

"It's possible the price of oil and therefore aviation fuel may rise in the medium term (it's priced in dollars and could get more expensive with weaker sterling) but airlines normally hedge their fuel purchases well in advance so there really shouldn't be any short term changes to air fares. Only if there's some shameless profiteering!

"If we do leave the EU, airlines and hotels will still have seats and rooms to fill with big-spending British holidaymakers so they'll need to find ways to keep us travelling i.e absorb costs. In short, carry on holidaying!"

