Consider the economic benefits of the EU and vote to Remain at the ballot box

2016-06-19

Sometimes something happens that stops us all in our tracks.

The shocking news of the murder of MP Jo Cox has done just that. We will need time to question, to reflect and to understand.

And yet somehow, in the midst of this, we will also need to take a vital decision on our future.

In or out of the European Union? It’s clear this vote matters. And people are rightly asking, “What are the facts?”

My organisation, the CBI, speaks for 190,000 firms across the UK, so I hope I can offer some answers.

It’s clear that being inside the EU, with full access for our Great British businesses to 27 other countries and in a market totalling 500 million customers, has helped fuel our economy for the last 40 years.

It has created jobs and money – for us and for our public services.

The EU doesn’t always get it right – firms complain about some rules – but the benefits far outweigh the costs.

Read more: Britain is stronger, safer and better off IN Europe and we must keep that safe

Every survey of businesses – small, medium and large – shows most think it best to stay in, for investment and jobs.

Nine out of 10 economists say being in is better for our economy.

Our partners in Europe, President Obama and the Commonwealth nations are clear it’s best that we remain in.

As consumers, we’ve been winners. The EU means more choice and lower prices.

We enjoy cheaper flights to more destinations and from next summer you will pay the same for calls, texts and data in Europe as you would here.

We have safer products, better rights at work and better action on issues like climate change. All this will be at risk if we leave.

We don’t know what “Out” looks like – it has never been done before – and the Leave campaign has simply not told us.

But we are already seeing what will happen: the Pound has had a big drop, making holidays this summer dearer.

Supermarket, energy and airline bosses warn of price rises.

Every estimate suggests each home will be several thousand pounds worse off if we leave.

EU Referendum countdown

So consider the facts before you head to the ballot box.

I hope you’ll join me and vote to remain on Thursday.

