Labour heartlands give huge backing to Brexit as the North votes to Leave

2016-06-24

Labour is facing an extraordinary meltdown in its traditional heartlands as working-class areas voted 'Leave' in their droves.

Despite the party leadership and almost every Labour MP campaigning for Remain, traditional Labour areas ignored their pleas and voted to pull Britain out of the EU.

The results have piled huge pressure on Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, with many MPs blaming him for a lacklustre campaign and for failing to connect with working class voters.

UKIP said privately it now hoped to start winning Parliamentary seats in former Labour strongholds in 2020.

Labour Shadow Chancellor John McDonnell admitted: “There is a disaffected vote.

“It's disaffected with politics overall, it's disaffected with Westminster politics in particular. Some of that is Labour supporters too.

“We've done our best to turn that around but it's been tough.”

The Remain vote faced its most crushing defeat in Labour strongholds across the North East.

In Middlesbrough the result was 65% to 35% for Leave, while in Sunderland it was 61% to 39%.

Leave campaigners were jubilant at the North East landslide.

Richard Elvin, a former UKIP councillor who coordinated the Vote Leave campaign in Sunderland, warned the result would have “huge consequences” for Labour in the north-east.

“Voters made a big statement, saying we’re sick to death of politics as it is,” he said. “It could change the political landscape.”

Bridget Phillipson, the Labour MP for Houghton and Sunderland South, said she knew the pro-EU campaign faced an uphill struggle.

She said: “There’s huge anger that time and again our region is left behind when it comes to jobs and investment.

"We don’t get what we need from the Tory government – people feel like they continue to be kicked."

The disastrous results saw Labour collapse into in-fighting, with shadow cabinet minister Chris Bryant saying he felt like "punching" former leader Ed Miliband when he appeared on TV.

Others turned their fire on to the new Labour leader Mr Corbyn, who could not face a leadership challenge in the coming weeks.

Long-term critic Jamie Reed tweeted: "No doubt, tonight, whatever the result, the Labour Party has to change fundamentally."

And former minister Ian Lucas warned the party needs a "big change in its approach".

Rochdale MP Simon Danczuk, who is currently suspended from the Labour Party , placed the blame for the poor Remain vote in the party's heartlands on Mr Corbyn.

“I think the leadership of the party – Jeremy primarily – struggles to communicate with our people in the north," he said.

“Many of them think he's a very principled person but don't believe what he has to say. They don't listen to him.

“He just doesn't get his message across and that is a real problem not just for this referendum but for a future general election.

“If your core vote aren't listening then you're not going to win a future general election.

“I think there's some anti-politics – large swathes of people across the north who believe, rightly, that the Conservatives don't care for their towns and cities in the north and believe the Labour Party is led by a north London elite who, not so much don't care for them, but don't understand them."

John Mann, one of the few Labour MPs supporting Leave, said the party had lost touch with its core supporters.

"Labour voters have voted decisively to leave the EU," he said.

"Labour has gone wrong by not being in touch with its voters. I've been saying this for the last 10 years in relation to immigration and the free movement of labour. It's not something new.

"The country is offering working class people zero hours contracts, agency work, and people are sick to death of it."

Another Leave-supporting Labour MP, Kate Hoey, added: "We've known for a long time the Labour Party view on this is out of step with Labour supporters and ex-Labour supporters - who I'm afraid we will find will probably not come back to us.

Leave was also on course to win in Wales last night in a result which genuinely shocked many local Labour activists.

Plaid Cymru leader Leanne Wood said: “It’s looking as though those areas where there are greatest areas of deprivation and poverty, those areas which are receiving the most amount of money from EU funds are the areas where people are voting in the greatest number to leave.

“I’m of the view it’s austerity that is at the root of the problem here.

"People want change and they’ve seen this as an opportunity to get the change they want.”

