How will Brexit affect cheap flights to Europe? And it's not all doom and gloom

2016-06-24

These days it can be cheaper to fly to Berlin than catch a train from London to Manchester - but with Brexit now set in stone, what's the future of our bargain flights to Europe?

On the eve of the big vote, budget airline Ryanair launched a massive 24 hour sale with seats as cheap as £9.99 to celebrate the EU referendum.

Meanwhile, in the seven days in the run up to the big vote British Airways, Monarch Airlines and Flybe launched rock bottom sales, with Thomson as low as £29 return to Spain.

This morning, Ryanair still has a host of reduced tickets up for grabs - as do Thomson and Monarch - but with Brexit official, are prices set to spike, permanently?

Leading low cost airlines easyJet and Ryanair say their bargain flights to Europe are owed very much to the EU after it liberalised the skies 20-years ago by creating the single aviation area.

Since 2006, this has created greater freedom for airlines to fly across Europe - as well as offering more opportunity for cross-border investment by European airlines.

Brexit could mean renegotiation of these agreements - and if competition is reduced, fares could increase.

EasyJet founder Sir Stelios Haji-Ioannou also previously warned that Brexit may lead to greater restrictions on airlines, as competition drops.

He said: "It is very possible that - in a post-Brexit Europe - a more restrictive aviation environment would mean fewer flights from the UK to Europe and hence less competition between airlines.

"That in turn would mean higher air fares so that the price of a family holiday to the Med will go back up again to levels last seen in the 1980s."

But, speaking on Friday following the referendum results, Chief Executive of easyJet Carolyn McCall said she remains confident leaving the EU won't affect the airline's ability to deliver long-term growth.

“We have today written to the UK Government and the European Commission to ask them to prioritise the UK remaining part of the single EU aviation market, given its importance to trade and consumers,” McCall said.

This would enable EU airlines to continue to fly freely within the UK and UK airlines across Europe - meaning consumers can still enjoy low fares.

Launching their 1 million £9.99 flights last night - and just hours before their big 'remain' blunder - Ryanair boss Michael O’Leary said: "Just like the EU Referendum, these fares are once in a lifetime and will be snapped up quickly, so customers should log onto www.ryanair.com before they sell out.

But, he also added: "If the Leave side do win, then these will be the last low fares the UK will enjoy for a very long time" implying cheap flights may not be on the card much longer for Ryanair customers.

Meanwhile, speaking about how Brexit will affect the price of travel to Europe, Cheapflights.co.uk managing director Andrew Shelton said: "Today’s Referendum result will throw the spotlight onto many benefits British travellers have taken for granted for years.

"Chief among these will be the European open skies agreements which created the environment for the budget airlines to thrive and which may now have to be renegotiated.

But, he added, the result doesn't mean 'all is lost'.

"The UK travel market is vital to the economy of many European countries and regions. It will be in their interests to seek ways to maintain the status quo. We believe a lot of effort will be made in the coming months and years to ensure the UK cash cow isn't put out to pasture."

Read more: Cost of your foreign holiday soars as pound plunges to 30-year low after Brexit

The latest airline to join the low-cost travel market Norwegian, is evidence that competitors from outside the EU can still offer cheap fares - with seats to much of Europe from £29.90 including taxes all year round.

Daily Mirror Travel Editor, Nigel Thompson explains: "The only impact Brexit would have immediately would be if the pound collapsed and travellers get a poor Euro exchange rate.

"It's possible the price of oil and therefore aviation fuel may rise in the medium term, but airlines normally hedge their fuel purchases well in advance so there really shouldn't be any short term changes to air fares. Only if there's some shameless profiteering.

"If we do leave the EU, airlines and hotels will still have seats and rooms to fill with big-spending British holidaymakers so they'll need to find ways to keep us travelling i.e absorb costs. In short, carry on holidaying!"

For information on how a weak pound could impact your holiday, click here.

Read more: Will Brexit affect your summer holidays? Here's what you need to know about passports, Euros and exchange rates

Brexit will take around two years to implement, meaning any holidays booked in the short term won't be affected.

If you're concerned about travelling in 2016, this is how Brexit will affect your EHIC card, and what will happen to your passport. For more guidance around data roaming, and healthcare, see our Brexit holiday FAQ.

