How will Brexit affect UK benefits? The EU referendum and the welfare state explained

2016-06-24

Sometimes the unexpected happens, and you need the state to step in. Whether it’s Jobseeker’s Allowance when you’re unemployed, or a disability benefit after an accident, or child tax credits to help you provide for a family.

But what if there weren’t any benefits to catch you when you fall?

Britain has voted to leave the European Union, and there could be knock-on effects for benefits.

Damian Green, a pro-Remain MP, said: “Brexit poses big risks for welfare.

“Being in Europe makes our welfare system better able to support pensioners, families and the most vulnerable.”

But Iain Duncan Smith, the former minister for Work and Pensions, argues a Brexit Britain could make welfare more fair.

He said: “We could end the absurd practice of UK taxpayers funding a system that involves sending child benefit to migrants' children who don't even live in this country, and limit access to benefits for those coming to the UK.”

So what is he talking about, and who is right?

The short answer? The British Government.

The main way to control benefits is to control spending.

When the Government looks at its budget, it gives a slice of the pie to benefits. It wields huge power about how this slice is doled out further.

For example, the Tories have promised pensioners that their state pension will rise by at least 2.5% each year, but at the same time they have frozen the rate of working age benefits.

Most of the power struggles over benefit cuts have taken place between the House of Commons and the House of Lords.

BUT there are some ways the EU has affected benefits.

For example, EU citizens who migrate to the UK may be able to claim benefits. More controversially, EU citizens whose children are still in their home country may be able to claim child benefit on their behalf.

This was already going to change.

The PM David Cameron has struck a deal that allows the Government to only allow EU nationals to start claiming benefits gradually. Newly arrived workers won’t be able to claim Jobseeker’s Allowance.

Parents will still be able to send child benefit money back home, but how much they get depends on the cost of living in that country.

It is worth remembering that, according to at least one academic study, migrants are less likely to claim benefits than Brits .

The Government didn’t get everything it asked for from the EU, so we could expect it to strip even more rights from EU nationals in the event of a Brexit.

But that doesn’t necessarily mean more for the rest of us.

If there’s a recession, as some are warning, the Government could find it has less money in the first place.

The main change would be if a Brexit forced the current Tory leadership out in favour of Leave campaigners.

Yes, those MPs like Iain Duncan Smith (voted for disability cuts), Boris Johnson (also voted for disability cuts) and Chris Grayling (voted for disability cuts and also slashed legal aid).

Cameron has already gone, will the the people who replace him be more generous with benefits? You decide.

