What on earth must The Queen be thinking after the UK voted for Brexit?

2016-06-24

What must The Queen think about all of this?

I've been asked this question more than once today.

While it's a fool who would claim to know Her Majesty's thoughts on the EU referendum result and her nation's decision to vote for Brexit, my view is the mood at Buckingham Palace will not be jubilant this morning.

"A country divided", the headlines are screaming.

That isn't a picture any Head of State wants to see.

Then there's Scotland.

No-one can forget The Queen's timely comments asking people to "think very carefully" ahead of the 2014 Scottish Referendum.

Or the fact that Cameron indiscreetly let slip she "purred down the line" when the result was a continued United Kingdom.

She must have thought that was the end of that. But the result of this vote has placed another Scottish referendum as a very real prospect.

And this time there is an extra reason to make the break up of the UK more likely.

If her 2014 comments were a deliberate intervention then maybe they worked.

But there were no such words ahead of this referendum .

"The Queen is politically neutral", said Buckingham Palace, naturally, whenever the question was posed.

Except the fact that there were no words from her didn't stop chatter about The Queen being Eurosceptic.

The palace complained when The Sun said she was pro Brexit , but by that time the suggestion was already in the public domain.

As her biographer Robert Lacey pointed out - and I wholeheartedly agree - there is a difference between being Eurosceptic and wanting the country to be out of the EU.

But in a referendum like this - where campaigning was fierce and brutal and the outcome one of two extremes - there was little room for subtleties.

Well, in a Constitutional Monarchy where Parliament has power, the simple answer is very little.

She spoke to David Cameron ahead of his decision to resign - and I suspect there wasn't much purring going on in that conversation.

And the Prime Minister later visited her at Buckingham Palace, where he can be sure whatever he said will be treated in confidence.

Now it's "business as usual" as The Queen carries out her ceremonial duties.

She will, of course, be kept informed of the political chaos.

But while the politicians flap wildly she will, at least, be epitomising the British motto of Keep Calm and Carry On.

