Arguments for and against Brexit as campaigners fight for Remain and Leave

2016-06-19

The deadline for the EU Referendum is fast approaching.

You can vote for Brexit, which would see the UK Leave the European Union.

Or you can opt to Remain within the union.

To help you decide, here are the arguments for and against Brexit 

Labour MPs Frank Fiend, Kate Hoey and Gisela Stuart

With youth unemployment at shocking levels, and no controls on immigration, it is clear Europe isn’t working for workers.

And we shouldn’t be surprised. The EU is run by five male presidents few of us have ever heard of – let alone elected.

It’s run by a powerful central bank in Frankfurt. It is run by big business and the thousands of lobbyists they employ.

Read more: There can be no lasting peace in Europe unless we stay united and vote Remain

It’s run by judges. It is run, primarily, by France and Germany – for reasons of history and because of their domination of the EU bureaucracy.

 

British people can and must break free. If we do, we will regain the right to control our borders.

The UK parliament will have the freedom to nationalise public services such as the railways, or do more to protect industries like steel.

Exit the EU and we’ll no longer have to pay the huge membership fee. We’ll be able to put more resources in the NHS.

There are fears some workers’ rights might be threatened but all rights are already incorporated in UK law.

Huge change can flow from leaving the EU. You can make it happen. It’s the most important vote of your lives.

Len McCluskey

As leader of the UK’s biggest union, I know the hopes and fears of the working-class communities.

Working people are fed up getting the rough end of the deal.

Our once great public services ruined by austerity, the mean McJobs, the boarded-up high streets, the struggle to keep a roof over a family’s head and food on the table.

Someone is to blame for this, but it’s not migrant workers.

Look at conditions at Sports Direct’s warehouse. Migrant workers are not to blame for that. Mike Ashley and his managers are the villains.

Read more: Gillian Duffy changed the course of an election and now she reveals why she's voting Brexit

A Brexit would be a dream come true for Ashley and his ilk. Boris Johnson and Nigel Farage have no intention of seeing working people “take back control”.

They intend to torch workers’ rights.

 EU Referendum countdown 

That is why Unite is fighting for a Remain vote. We want the best for our communities, for our children’s futures.

Jo Cox believed more unites us than divides us, that when we stand together, we thrive.

On Thursday, when you go to vote, let this belief in unity inspire you.

Vote hope – and vote remain.

