Fox News blunders reporting UK has left the UN instead of EU

2016-06-24

 American viewers waking up to this morning's Brexit news were a little confused when Fox News reported we had left the United Nations (UN) rather than the EU. 

 The American news channel confirmed David Cameron 's resignation and our exit from the EU with a breaking news alert. 

A headline interrupted viewing across the screen, reading: "British PM says he will step down. UK votes to leave the UN."

 While the UK has chosen to remove itself as a member state of the European Union, Britain firmly remains a member of the United Nations . 

The United Nations is made up of 193 countries, with the United Kingdom joining on October 24, 1945.

Its role is to act on issues facing humanity in the 21st century, such as peace, security, climate change, human rights and terrorism.

 Read more: David Cameron resigns: What were his best moments? And what were his worst? 

The UN also plays a major role in providing aid to those living in countries affected by war.

Confused Fox Viewers took to Twitter after spotting the TV blunder.

 Following the UK's exit from the EU, David Cameron announced his resignation as Prime Minister. 

Addressing the nation, an emotional Cameron said: "I love this country and I feel honoured to have served it.''

"Over 33 million people from England, Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and Gibraltar have all had their say.

"We should be proud of the fact that in these islands we trust the people for these big decisions.

 Read more: David Cameron's resignation speech in full 

"We not only have a parliamentary democracy, but on questions about the arrangements for how we've governed there are times when it is right to ask the people themselves and that is what we have done."

Peter Mandelson has described today's upheavals as "the worst day in post war British history".

 His comments come in the wake of British Prime Minister David Cameron resigning after the UK voted to leave the EU. 

 Meanwhile, the country will now face a nervous wait as to who will become the next Prime Minister . 

 Former London mayor Boris Johnson was pictured leaving his home to a chorus of booing this morning. 

 The Brexit backer was protected by police as he was bundled into a blacked-out people carrier. 

 Read more: Donald Trump says it's a "great thing" Britain has "taken back their country" as he arrives in Scotland 

Reporters had been expecting some triumphant words from the Leave leader and potential next Prime Minister but Boris dashed from his front door and into the car before driving off.

