What will Brexit mean for shopping, petrol prices, pensions, house prices, the NHS and crime

2016-06-24

Q. Is the price of the weekly shop going to go up? by Ruki Sayid, Consumer Editor

A.There’s no easy way to say it - Brexit is bad news for families who now face a 3% hike at supermarket checkouts, adding £120 a year to shopping bills.

We import 40% of our food of which 27% is from the EU and with the pound taking a hit against the dollar and euro, products like fresh fruit, meat and veg will be more expensive sooner rather than later.

Staples with a longer shelf life like tins and frozen food will take a little longer to catch up.

Experts Adam Leyland, editor of The Grocer and Richard Lim, chief executive of Retail Economics say supermarkets are already working on wafer thin margins and it is unlikely they will be able to absorb the higher cost of imports.

That can only mean the cost of living will soar as ordinary families pay the price for food from abroad.

The longterm is just as gloomy as farmers and food manufacturers lose EU subsidies and with no Government plans to replace them on a like-for-like basis, costs will be passed on to consumers.

For millions already struggling to put food on the table, higher grocery bills will be hard to swallow.

Read more: Brexit takes us back to the 1800s

Q. Is this good or bad news for the NHS? by Andrew Gregory, Health Editor

A. The short answer is it’s not clear yet. The NHS Confederation, which represents 85% of NHS providers and commissioners insisted it was “impossible to predict the full impact at this stage”.

But its chief executive Stephen Dalton warned it was “vital” the Government now get a “strong” deal with Europe that “recognises how interwoven NHS and EU policies have become”.

Senior midwives, doctors and nurses all expressed fears that Brexit will hit NHS funding.

One thing is certain. Brexit will not mean an extra £350million a week for the NHS saved from contributions to the EU. Nigel Farage admitted the Leave campaign’s claim was a “mistake” and he “can’t” guarantee the NHS will get any extra cash.

In fact, it’s far more likely to receive less cash in the short term. This would mean fewer doctors, fewer nurses, and longer waiting times for patients.

“The NHS is facing unprecedented financial difficulty and needs a long-term sustainable funding settlement to allow it to navigate the real challenges it faces,” Quentin Cole, Health Partner at PwC, told me. “This result makes that less likely as we face the very real prospect of economic uncertainty.”

Q. What will happen to house prices and my mortgage? by Graham Hiscott, Business Editor

A. The Brexit vote could have a big impact on the housing market. If it leads to another financial crisis, then it could drive up lenders’ funding costs which, in turn, might mean dearer mortgages for new borrowers. However, the Bank of England has earmarked £250billion to try to prevent that happening.

The Bank could also cut its base rate - already just 0.5% - to boost the flagging economy.

House prices might be hit if mortgage costs rise and if a slowing economy deters buyers. Set against that is a chronic housing shortage, which has fuelled the price surge. George Osborne warned a Brexit could lead to an 18% slump in property prices. Put another way, that’s back to where prices were around two years ago.

Q. Will the price of petrol increase? by Colin Goodwin expert

A. Crude oil is traded in dollars so if Sterling is weak the price we pay for petrol at the pumps is going to go up. If the pound rallies quickly and goes back to the value it was before Brexit then we’re unlikely to see any difference in prices. But there is concern Britain may be charged a higher oil price than the EU, particularly by Russia. And if the economy stagnates and we go into a recession the treasury will be looking for ways to increase revenue and an easy way to do that would be to stick extra duty on the price of a litre of petrol.

Q. What will happen to my pension? by Tricia Phillips, Personal Finance Editor

A. Turmoil in the global markets means pension funds have taken a big dip. My advice is don’t panic and don’t make any rash decisions.

Those already retired and who get their pension via an annuity have made a good call as their income is guaranteed for the rest of their lives.

If you are drawing an income via a drawdown product your pension pot will probably have fallen in value. You will need to limit withdrawals as much as you can to give your remaining funds a chance to recover.

Those heading towards retirement may end up with smaller pension pots. For some the only option will be to delay retirement, hoping the markets will pick up and pension savings will have a chance to recover.

A downturn in the economy will mean bigger pressures on the public purse strings and this could mean those relying on the state pension are in for a nasty shock, if the Government pulls the plug on the Triple Lock, which guarantees a minimum 2.5% increase to the state pension each year.

Meanwhile the rest of us still in work could end up having to literally work ‘til we drop before any sign of our state pension. Already the age we have to keep grafting to is 66, rising to 67 in 2026 but Brexit could now trigger a faster rise in state pension age.

Q. Will my holiday be more expensive? By Nigel Thompson Travel Editor

A. In the short term, yes. Sterling’s slump means your spending power in the eurozone and USA particularly is way down.

In the longer term, nobody knows. Much depends at what levels the pound stabilises. If it stays low, the cost of hotel rooms etc to tour operators will rise, and no doubt be passed on to the consumer.

European air fares are generally low thanks to competition within Europe’s aviation ‘single market’. If we’re out of that, analysts warn of up to 30% rises. The price of aviation fuel is also a factor, as it’s priced in dollars.

But remember, Brits spend big on their holidays and Europe needs, and wants, our valuable custom, so I’d expect there to be deals and incentives to keep us travelling.

Q. Will Brexit a win for terrorists? by Chris Hughes, Defence and Security Editor

A. Britain has two main security concerns, the first from Russia and its allies and the second is from Islamic State.

President Putin will be emboldened by a Europe diminished by Britain’s departure because his biggest fear is a strong and united Europe supported by America.

Putin sees Britain as a threat, as his constant probes towards our airspace and coastline, prove.

There are agreements in place so that European intelligence agencies will swap key intelligence relating to Islamic State terror, even after Britain leaves Europe.

But there is always strength in numbers and I believe that in the short term, say for the next five years, leaving Europe makes Britain a little more exposed to Russian threats and Islamic State attacks.

Q. What does Brexit mean for Premier League football? by Dave Kidd

A. At present European Union players are not subject to the same work permit restrictions as the rest of the world - and around 60 per cent of players starting matches are non-British. In theory, a vast swathe of current Premier League players – including Manchester United’s Anthony Martial and N’Golo Kante of champions Leicester - would not have gained entry if Britain had not been EU members.

So, amid immediate short-term uncertainty, there may be transfer hyper-inflation for British players – and also the possibility of England’s clubs trying to stockpile more top EU talent before Brexit takes effect.

Yet Premier League chiefs believe neither of those approaches is necessary.

It is felt that any points-based immigration system agreed during exit negotiations would not restrict the entry of foreign footballers, who contributed more than half a billion pounds in income tax and national insurance last year. In short, footballers are not the sort of immigrants Boris Johnson and Nigel Farage dislike – and right-wing politicians will always find loopholes for the wealthy.

Q. What will happen to my savings? by Tricia Phillips, Personal Finance Editor

A. Cash in bank accounts and building societies covered by the Financial Services Compensation Scheme is safe, up to £75,000 per person per account. However, if you have money in stocks and shares ISAs and other investments your balance may have taken a dive.

The Governor of the Bank of England, Mark Carney, has said he will take every measure to stabilise the economy and that could mean increasing or decreasing the base rate.

If he decreases it, savers will be hit with further reductions in already pathetic rates of interest on their cash.

Meanwhile if he decides to put the base rate up that could signal a glimmer of hope for savers. Although banks won’t be quick to put their rates up – so they may have to wait a while for any gains.

Q. Has Brexit made Britain less safe? By Tom Pettifor, Chief Crime Correspondent

A. We were told during the Referendum campaign that the outcome of EU vote would have huge implications for the criminal justice system as both sides attempted to play on the fears of voters.

But it has always been clear that the police and security services in the UK and Europe would continue to work together closely to achieve their common goals bilaterally, whatever the outcome.

Though Brexit means an end to membership of the intelligence sharing organisation Europol, this will not stop our counter terror police working with EU counterparts as they did so effectively after the Paris and Brussels terror attacks.

Former MI6 head Sir Richard Dearlove said EU-based security bodies were of “little consequence”.

And though Britain will have no access to the European arrest warrant, which has seen more than 5,000 suspected criminals extradited from Britain to Europe in the past five years, new security agreements can now be agreed.

