'Is Dad allowed to stay?': The agonising question one family faced after UK voted for Brexit

2016-06-24

 The UK is still processing the result of yesterday's EU referendum and what it means for our country. 

We don't yet know what will happen to our jobs, economy and travel prospects - but EU nationals living here are waking up today with an even more uncertain future.

Suddenly they face the prospect they might have to leave the lives they have built - or, if they stay, deal with the horrible thoughts that they're now unwelcome.

One Spanish man who has lived and worked in the UK for 20 years spoke to Mirror Online about what it means for him - and the heartbreaking question his son asked this morning.

Fernando Rosell is a 45-year-old university lecturer living in Milton Keynes.

 Below is his reaction to the Brexit vote in his own words. 

"This morning, my husband told our son what the outcome of the Referendum was.

"My son's response was to ask if that meant I would have to leave the country.

"My son is not the only child of EU citizens worried about their future.

"A Hungarian colleague told me this morning that her kids asked her if they were still allowed to go to school.

"Another colleague found her son crying on his bed.

"He was very upset because his mum is French and his dad is German, and he didn't know what would become of him.

 "After a referendum campaign that centred on the fear of UK citizens about immigrants, it's those immigrants and their families that face heartbreak and uncertainty about their rights to remain in the country, their job stability, and how colleagues and neighbours feel about them in the aftermath of the referendum. 

"I've lived, worked and paid taxes in this country for over 20 years and always felt welcome.

"The rhetoric of the Leave campaign and its supporters has made me feel uncomfortable and sometimes unwelcome for the first time.

"As a languages lecturer I meet many British students who study languages because they want to expand their views and live in other countries.

"These students learn other world views and open their eyes to multiculturalism.

"One thing that seems to have escaped the campaign is that Britain is a country of migrants.

"British citizens expanded their culture and language to America, Australia, India... And now they fear migrants. What a turnaround."

When it comes to foreign EU nationals already living and working in the UK, they will not be deported from the country.

 EU nationals who came to this country legally, under rules that existed when they arrived will not be made to leave, as reported by the Birmingham Mail . 

 Earlier today, in a speech in which he resigned, Prime Minister David Cameron said: "I would reassure Britons living in European countries and European citizens living here there will be no immediate changes in your circumstances." 

  Are you an EU migrant living in the UK who has been affected by today's decision to leave the EU? Email yourmirror@mirror.co.uk.  

