How many of Britain's laws REALLY come from the EU? The Brexit question no one can answer

2016-06-21

How many of Britain's laws come from Brussels?

It sounds like an easy question, doesn't it.

Well you're wrong.

Remainers and Brexiteers have fought for years over this percentage-shaped holy grail.

In just one TV debate, Nick Clegg said it was 7% while Nigel Farage said it was 75%.

Now David Cameron has joined the fray, telling MPs today: "Far from the very high figures quoted by some, more like 13%, 14% or 15% of laws come to us from that direction."

Read more: 

7%

14%

75%

Well, Clegg and Farage were definitely wrong - but it turns out our Prime Minister is too.

Here we explain why it's so tough to unpick the number of our laws that come from the EU - and come as close to an answer as we can.

You'll have seen Nigel Farage puffing his chest in the European Parliament and David Cameron negotiating at the European Council .

But the factory that churns out laws we know about farming, fishing and everything else is the European Commission , a huge building in Brussels (above).

Over the last decade it's made between 1,000 and 2,000 laws every year - some huge, some tiny.

There are three types.

Some of them have to be wrapped into laws on UK soil. Others stand on their own.

The European Court of Justice is there to make sure those laws are upheld.

Thinking of the European Court of Human Rights ? Stop it. Despite what many people think, it's not part of the EU.

Just look at how many types of law there are.

That means you come to a different figure depending on which ones you choose to add up.

Nick Clegg's 7% does match a figure used in some studies, but only for individual years.

Nigel Farage got his 75% by quoting Viviane Reding, a European Commissioner from Luxembourg.

What she actually said was a bit woollier than that: "I don't know if it's 80% or 75%. The truth is most laws applied, executed, implemented at national level are based on European laws."

No major study we've seen has come to 75%.

The Tory leader was using figures from the House of Commons Library, which wrote a report on this pesky business last year .

The study said 13.2% of all laws made in the UK between 1993 and 2014 have been EU-related.

These are split into the two types of British law:

Acts of Parliament are the big show-stoppers. They change the landscape and go through a process that can last for years.

Since 1993 just 1.4% of Acts have been exclusively because of the EU. But that's misleading because Acts are very long and have many parts.

In all, 24% of Acts - 231 - had clauses involving the EU in some way and that figure's on the rise. Since 2011 it's been 40% or more every year.

Statutory instruments are used to push through smaller changes.

Since 1993, 12.9% of them - 4,283 - have been used to enact EU laws here in Britain.

That study looked at laws that have passed through the UK Parliament.

But EU regulations can affect this country without needing a new law on British soil.

This is how the eurosceptic group For Britain came to the much more shocking figure of 65% .

It did this by counting EVERY law passed by the European Commission between 1993 and 2014 as a "UK law from Brussels".

There have been 49,699 of them, so unsurprisingly that pushed up the numbers a bit.

Once those are included in the total, 59.3% of all "UK laws" are European Commission laws. Another 5.4% are British laws linked to the EU, like we counted above.

NO!

This calculation swings much too far the other way.

This is because not every EU law affects Britain .

Some of them are about olive and tobacco growers, for example. Good luck with that in our rain-soaked fields.

And because the count goes back to 1993, it could include laws that have been axed , replaced by others or become plain irrelevant .

This numbers game is all lots of fun (Please don't fall asleep! Please!).

But it completely misses the fact that "one law" and "one law" aren't the same.

Some laws are tiny. Many statutory instruments can be passed every week and most of them don't have a big effect on your life.

Then there are mammoth laws like the Trade Union Bill and the Welfare Reform and Work Bill .

Each of these only counts as "one law" - but they're introducing a massive list of separate changes to ordinary people's rights to claim benefits and go on strike.

The House of Commons Library, the Prime Minister's favourite source, threw their hands up in defeat.

In a follow-up blog, they admitted it was "possible to justify" any figure between 15% and 55% , and the real answer lies somewhere in between.

"The limitations of data make it impossible to achieve an accurate measure", they sighed.

So congratulations! Everyone is completely right.

Apart from David Cameron , Nigel Farage and Nick Clegg.

Try to do better than them the next time you're in the pub.

