Who is favourite to replace Remain loser David Cameron as Prime Minister?

2016-06-24

Boris Johnson was the favourite to replace Remain-loser David Cameron after the Prime Minister said he would quit by October.

 A Tory leadership contest was sparked after Mr Cameron’s EU referendum gamble ended in humiliating defeat. 

Chief Brexiteer Mr Johnson was given odds of 4/5 to claim the keys to No10 by bookmakers William Hill after leading Vote Leave to ballot box triumph.

But he faces a potential showdown with Home Secretary Theresa May to seize the party reins – who is 3/1 second favourite.

And other Cabinet big hitters are also poised to throw their hats into the ring.

 Mr Cameron – who had repeatedly insisted he would not resign if Britain voted Out – wants his successor in place before the Conservative Party conference. 

Sources confirmed Mrs May was in talks with allies over whether to run. Tory MPs will whittle down the field to just two, with party members making the final decision.

Education Secretary Nicky Morgan, who is also tipped to be considering a leadership tilt, said: “I have said before I think it would be really good to have a woman in the final two but that’s a matter for the Parliamentary Party, and it’s a question of who the Parliamentary Party thinks is the right person to lead – not just in terms of the negotiations but also the wider ‘one nation’ agenda that we set out in our manifesto last year and that we were elected on.”

 While Chancellor George Osborne’s leadership hopes lay in tatters, with his fortunes tied to the PM’s, Justice Secretary Michael Gove was on 5/1 – despite ruling himself out three weeks ago, saying: “The one thing I can tell you is there are lots of talented people who could be PM after David Cameron but count me out.” 

The early jockeying for position to succeed Mr Cameron marks a spectacular turnaround for the Tory leader, 11 years after he became party boss. He had been in Downing Street for six years and secured the Conservatives’ first outright general ­election win for 23 years just 13-and-a-half months ago.

He revealed his plan not to seek a third term during the 2015 campaign. But his manifesto pledge for an In/Out referendum on the UK’s EU membership proved his undoing.

In an emotional statement outside No 10, the outgoing PM said yesterday: “The British people have made a very clear ­decision to take a different path, and as such I think the country requires fresh leadership to take it in this direction.” Meanwhile, Mr Johnson was mobbed by hundreds of furious protesters who shouted “scum” as he tried to leave his home yesterday morning.

Up to 300 people had joined the world’s media outside his townhouse in Islington, North London. There were shouts of “idiot”, “shame on you Boris” and “thanks for f****ng our future”.

 Mr Johnson silently rushed through a line of police officers who struggled to contain the angry crowd before he was whisked away in a taxi to a Vote Leave victory event. Mr Johnson, who like the PM is an Old Etonian who went to Oxford and was in the hell-raising Bullingdon Club , later praised the PM. 

 He said: “I have known David Cameron for a very long time and I believe he has been one of the most extraordinary politicians of our age. He is a brave and principled man who has given superb leadership of his party and his country for many years.” 

But he was tight-lipped on his own leadership ambitions. Asked by the Mirror during the referendum campaign about the prospect of “Prime Minister Boris”, he insisted: “There is not going to be any such character.” But he admitted in 2013: “If the ball came loose from the back of the scrum, which it won’t of course, it would be a great, great thing to have a crack at.”

Mr Johnson has only been back in ­Parliament since last May, having spent eight years as Mayor of London.

He is hugely popular with the party grass-roots but has few pals among Tory MPs – many of whom dislike his bumbling style and prefer Mrs May’s quieter, more reserved tone.

