Britain is stronger, safer and better off IN Europe and we must keep that safe

2016-06-19

Britain is stronger, safer and better off in Europe.

If you don’t want to trust the experts – and every credible economist and financial institution is in the same place on this – trust your own gut instinct.

If we sever our biggest and closest trading relationship, are we likely to be better off?

If we separate ourselves from our closest political partners, are we likely to have more influence in the world?

Our top priority must be to keep our economy safe. We must keep jobs safe.

Our manufacturing industry is strong in Britain because it has direct access to the world’s biggest marketplace – 500 million European consumers.

If we leave the EU, our trade will be hit. Exports and imports will become more expensive.

They will face new barriers. As a result, we will export less and the prices in our shops will go up.

Read more: Separating the facts from the fiction in the EU Referendum debate

That will impact directly on jobs and pay packets at home.

People like Nigel Farage say this is a price worth paying. But it’s not his future employment that’s at stake, it’s yours and your children’s.

Away from the TV he admits our economy may be weaker but that we will “have more control”.

Don’t let him con you. We will be at the mercy of others who will tell us how much we can trade with them.

Immigration isn’t going to stop. And by ourselves in the world, we will have less power not more.

He and his friends cannot even agree among themselves what sort of trading relationship they want with Europe.

That’s because none of the options are better for us than what we have now.

To meet the biggest challenges that face us in the years ahead – crime, terrorism and protecting the environment – we need strength in numbers that working with our allies in Europe gives us.

EU Referendum countdown

The Leave campaigners promise you the Earth – more money for the NHS and everything else they think you want to hear. But if it sounds too good to be true, that’s because it is.

If we quit the EU, our former partners are not going to put a sign over the door saying “sorry you are leaving but please come and go as you please and help yourself to anything you want”.

They are not naïve. And we are not mugs.

Of course the EU is far from perfect, but we should be there making it better, not leaving it to others to make ­decisions we will have to live with.

If we leave now, that’s it. We can’t change our minds when things go wrong. So don’t take the risk.

