David Cameron lost the EU referendum a year ago - when he failed to negotiate an immigration answer

2016-06-24

David Cameron could and should have asked for more.

When he set off on his renegotiation tour last May, asking EU leaders to back his reform plans, he was starting on the second leg of a two-term premiership.

The first Tory boss to win a majority for 23 years.

His party had re-established foot holds in Wales and Scotland.

He had ruthlessly vanquished the Lib Dems in their south west heartlands.

He was triumphant, on a roll, basking in glory.

He had a mandate to demand meaningful change from the EU.

Britain is the second biggest contributor to the EU budget.

We are one of only two EU states with nuclear weapons.

We have higher economic growth than the Union average.

We have created as many jobs here in recent years as the rest of the EU combined.

Put simply, the PM had a great hand.

But either he didn't realise it, or he was too sporting to play it.

People don't care for vague concepts such as sovereignty.

And they don't believe dire warnings of economic hardship in decades to come, issued by forecasters who can't get their predictions right from one quarter to the next.

But they do know if they can't get a doctor's appointment for two weeks, can't find a seat on the bus or find their wages driven down by cheap foreign labour.

Cameron had twice gone to the polls promising to slash net migration to below 100,000.

He's got no say over the number of Britons moving abroad, and he apparently chooses not to control the numbers coming from non-EU countries.

But the fact is, he simply cannot control numbers from the EU.

He should have demanded a limit from Europe.

He should have said we will only accept x-number a year for the next x-number of years.

Cameron could have asked them to compromise if they really wanted us to Remain, by giving us the emergency brake on immigration that would have helped cut net migration – and quash fears, justified or otherwise, in communities across the country

But he didn't.

Instead he got a deal to curb migrant benefits for four years.

But he wouldn't say by how much this would cut net migration.

Why not? Because he knew – as most of us do – the overwhelming come to work, not sponge off our welfare state.

It wouldn't cut the numbers by very much at all.

 And his decision to duck a confrontation with the EU over the record numbers coming to the UK has cost Britain its EU membership - and quite probably the PM his job . 

If only he'd asked for more when he had the chance.

