After EU Referendum we must replace campaign of hate and fear with hope

2016-06-23

After Project Fear and Project Hate, there is much healing to be done. The wounds on both sides are deep and bloody.

Never in generations has any UK election witnessed such anger, vitriol and lies.

Hackles have been raised at public rallies, television debates and in offices, pubs and homes.

There have been Blue on Blue attacks by the Tories.

Amber Rudd blasted Boris Johnson in one debate, saying the only number he was interested in was Number 10.

Red on Red was almost as bad with Labour Party whisperings about Jeremy Corbyn’s lackadaisical campaign mounting to angry barracking.

Everywhere the screams of “liar”, “bigot”, “racist”, “elitist”, and “opportunist” grew louder alongside piercing political dog whistles.

And then the screeching was punctuated by three gun shots.

Three shots into the body of little Cuillin and Lejla Cox’s mum.

There was a national intake of horrified breath. How had we come to this?

How had a five and three year old been left without their mum, 41-year-old Labour MP and Remain campaigner Jo Cox ?

There was a three-day suspension of campaigning. But on social media the period of mourning lasted barely three minutes.

Almost immediately the anger escalated to a whole new level between those who claimed Jo Cox’s death was being used to make political capital for Remain.

And those who insisted it was disrespectful and malicious to deliberately ignore the political context.

And so it went on. From quarrelsome Question Times to slanging matches on the stump, to all-out hate fests on Facebook .

Police across Britain were kept busy with death and rape threats against anyone daring to voice an opposing view.

Disagreeing with an opponent was no longer sufficient in this pestilent politics.

Research revealed 70% of university graduates supported Remain while 68% of those whose education ended with GCSEs backed Leave.

This referendum provided an opportunity which had been a long time coming – the chance for ordinary working people to show they’d had enough.

Enough of feeling no-one understood their concerns.

Concern at how mass immigration was changing their towns and depressing wages was dismissed as “bigotry”.

At how a lack of decent jobs was rejected as an inevitability of globalisation.

And how the lightning speed of change – in everything from shopping to communication to table manners – was batted off as “modernity”.

Meanwhile the establishment and elite were singing “I’m Alright, Jack” in perfect harmony.

Trust in our establishment lay in tatters amid MPs’ fiddled expense receipts, illegal wars, bankers’ bonus pay slips, tax avoidance by big business and multiple cases of police corruption.

Never in modern Britain has inequality been so marked.

The richest five families in Britain now own more than the poorest 12 million of us in the UK.

In 2000 chief execs of the FTSE 100 companies earned 47 times more than their average employee.

Now it’s 120 times. Our under 25s are the first generation in a century to be worse off than the generation before them.

Many will never own their own home yet still house building proceeds at glacial speed.

Big business is failing our country. Yet our politicians are either unable or unwilling to change it.

Meanwhile the Tory government wiped one million people off the electoral roll.

Anyone would think they didn’t want a democracy (remind us just why you didn’t give 16 and 17-year-olds a vote on their future, Mr Cameron ?).

The system is sick. And the public is sick of it.

“You can’t trust anyone these days” and “They’re all in it for themselves” has become the soundtrack of the early 21st century.

Some people have responded by following the “authentic appeal” of characters like Jeremy Corbyn and Nigel Farage.

But many more have simply disengaged from politics entirely. A third of the electorate didn’t even vote in the last election.

And so paramount in this period of healing is to find a new politics which speaks to ordinary working people.

And doesn’t just tell them that it hears their anger. That it is actually working to ease it.

We must find a way to make the benefits of a global economy work for the many not the few.

We need to put pressure on employers to give workers security. And make builders and planners create homes for families.

We need to find a way in which how we are governed is shaped by the masses, not the minority.

We need to find a way of discussing politics where opponents are treated with respect.

We need to find a new way in the media of communicating politics to make it relevant and engaging.

We need to control immigration and protect communities so people feel secure I their own lives.

We need a welfare system which seems fair and protects those truly in need.

Without these things the fetid air of the past few months will only turn more sour.

With them our United Kingdom can finally feel united.

