David Cameron's successes were significant - but he'll always be remembered as a failure

2016-06-24

 They say all political careers end in failure. But there are few, if any, Prime Ministers who have been the architects of their own downfall in such spectacular fashion as David Cameron . 

 Let us be clear – this referendum was his choice. 

In 2006, Europe was a side issue for most voters. One of his first messages to his party on becoming leader a decade ago was that they should stop “banging on about Europe”.

His failure to quieten the Tory eurosceptics would come back to haunt him – and how.

Over a 10-year career at the top, Mr Cameron’s successes were limited but significant.

He made the Conservative Party electable again – albeit only in the wake of the worst financial crash Britain has seen in decades.

He formed a surprisingly durable Coalition Government. He was right to scrap Labour’s hated ID card scheme and brave to maintain Gordon Brown’s foreign aid spending in defiance of his own backbenchers.

Braver still was pushing through gay marriage laws, despite an uprising among grassroots Tories.

He survived a dangerous Scottish independence vote then used his ruthless election-winning machine to secure the first Tory majority in more than 20 years.

But his failures, even before this week, were substantial. His cruel austerity set a disastrous course.

Cuts were targeted at welfare support for Britain’s poorest. His handling of the NHS was reckless and failure to invest in affordable housing a national disgrace.

The truth is, Mr Cameron chose to balance the books on the backs of the poor. It is ironic those same people came back to bite the Prime Minister on Thursday.

But there were other, even bigger, misjudgements.

His empty promise to cut immigration to the “tens of thousands” turned a highly complex issue into a numbers game, and one that he could never win.

And the decision in 2012, amid warnings UKIP was eating into his core support, to launch a referendum on Europe was a strategic error that would ultimately cost him his job.

This arrogant Old Etonian believed he could breeze through any popular vote, never appreciating the scale of anger towards him over immigration.

David Cameron was simply swept away by an outpouring of rage from the electorate.

And so, after six years, Mr Cameron will be remembered only as a failure – the Prime Minister who lost Britain’s place in Europe.

