An EU Referendum Remain vote stands up for working people whose jobs depend on trade

2016-06-20

Thursday’s referendum on the European Union is a massive moment in British politics.

The result – whatever it is – will have a huge impact on our economy and society for years to come.

It will shape the wider world in which we live and help determine the future prospects of our children and grandchildren.

I am certain that voting to Remain in the EU is the right choice for the United Kingdom, the right choice for jobs, and the right choice for our future prosperity.

A vote to Remain is a vote to stand up for working people across the country whose jobs and communities depend on our ability to trade with Europe.

Three million jobs in the UK are linked to EU exports. That’s around one in every 10 jobs in the country.

These jobs are the livelihoods of people up and down the country, working in companies big and small, in vital industries like manufacturing which rely on exporting products abroad.

Read more: The EU referendum will harm the British pound AND the Euro - whatever the outcome, experts warn

The Leave campaign has completely failed to explain how if we leave Europe we can still have access to Europe’s market – vital for UK jobs. That’s a risk that our country simply can’t afford to take.

A vote to Remain will also be a vote to stand up for the rights of everyone to be treated fairly at work.

This is something the Labour Party cares passionately about.

It’s why when a Labour Government was elected in 1997, I, as Prime Minister, signed up to the European Social Chapter – to ensure decent terms and conditions for British workers including guaranteed paid holidays.

It’s too easy to take these rights, which are underpinned by EU law, for granted. Never forget one thing.

Many of those leading the Leave campaign opposed the Social Chapter; opposed our introduction of the minimum wage; opposed basic trade union rights.

They believe being out of Europe gives them a chance to chip away at all of these hard won and necessary protections. Don’t let them.

Thursday’s vote is fundamentally one about the sort of country we want to live in and the sorts of opportunities we can provide for future generations.

If we stay, future growth and trade with our European neighbours promises hundreds of thousands of more British jobs in industries like digital services, energy and tourism.

EU Referendum countdown

These are the jobs of the future we need to seize with both hands if we want to ensure our children are able to thrive in an increasingly globalised world.

I understand that people are often frustrated about the way the EU works. But Britain is undoubtedly better off in.

Our membership has already brought us huge opportunities and staying in will allow us to benefit even more.

Let’s not forget that the decision on Thursday is a one-off choice between staying in or leaving completely.

Given what’s at stake for British jobs and our economy choosing to Remain is the best option for Britain.

