Britain's biggest car firms warn Brexit could put thousands of jobs at risk

2016-06-19

Britain’s biggest car firms are warning that quitting the EU could put jobs and investment at risk.

In a major intervention just three days before the referendum, the bosses of Jaguar Land Rover, Toyota, BMW and Vauxhall all say Brexit will damage the thriving industry.

They point out the motor industry supports 800,000 jobs in the UK and contributes £15.5billion to the economy.

This could be put a risk, they say in a statement organised by Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT).

The SMMT says 80% of cars made in the UK are exported abroad, with more than half of these (57.7%) going to the EU.

It says the unrestricted access to the EU and EU’s clout in securing trade deals have provided “significant benefits” to British business.

Read more: Arguments for and against Brexit as campaigners fight for Remain and Leave

The chairman of Vauxhall, Rory Harvey, says Brexit would be “undesirable” for his firm and the rest of the motoring industry.

“We are part of a fully integrated European company where we benefit from the free movement of goods and people.

"We believe not to be part of the EU would be undesirable for our business and the sector as a whole,” Mr Harvey said.

His fears were echoed by Ken Gregor of Jaguar Land Rover who said: “Remaining in the EU – our largest market – will increase Jaguar Land Rover’s chances to grow, create jobs and attract investment in future technologies.

“Our European supply chain has been fundamental in helping us to meet customer expectations worldwide and achieve sustainable, profitable growth.”

Tony Walker, deputy Managing Director of Toyota Motor Manufacturing UK, added: “After considered review, we believe that continued membership of the European Union is best for our business and for our competitiveness in the longer term.”

Virgin boss Sir Richard Branson also warns today of the threat posed by Brexit.

“As an entrepreneur I have been known for taking risks throughout my career but leaving the European Union is not one of the risks I would want the UK to take - not as an investor, not as a father and not as a grandfather.

I am deeply concerned about the impact of leaving,” he says.

He adds: “Setting up a new business was a challenge, I couldn’t move my employees between Britain and Europe without visas, moving goods was hugely complex with (35%) high taxes and the hassle of red tape and heavy handed bureaucracy. I’m saddened to think the UK would ever go back to that time.”

The warnings of business leaders came as George Osborne underlined the dangers of leaving, saying it was a “one-way door” to an uncertain world.

“It is important for people to know that if we vote to leave there is no turning back, it’s a one-way door to a much more uncertain world where people’s jobs and their livelihoods are at risk,” the Chancellor told Peston on Sunday.

Mr Osborne said the economic damage of Brexit could be worse than he has forecast and there would a “significant hit” to the UK.

“The central estimate is that our GDP would be five to six % smaller. Personally, I think it’s possible that it would be quite a lot worse than that.

“You can’t predict you know the enormous uncertainty that exiting the EU means for Britain.

“The trade deals that are suddenly torn up, the fact that we have no product regulation in our country, we’d have to write a whole load of new pieces of red tape in through our Parliament, the fact that Britain’s standing in the world would be diminished, the fact that there would be a flight from our currency.

“People are doing this already - they’re not buying houses, they’re not buying cars. They’re delaying investment.

“This is before the vote, this is a taste of things to come. People need to understand - if you vote to leave, there’s no turning back,” he said.

To underline the Chancellor’s words it emerged Britain’s biggest banks are drafting in staff to work through the night on Thursday amid fears a Brexit could send shockwaves through financial markets.

EU Referendum countdown

Barclays, Lloyds Banking Group and US giants such as JP Morgan Chase and Citi are among those calling in senior traders and workers for a turbulent 24 hours after voting closes at 10pm.

Part-nationalised Royal Bank of Scotland is also manning trading desks 24 hours thanks to teams in London, Singapore and Stamford in the US.

The Bank of England has issued stark warnings that a vote to leave the EU could spark turmoil in foreign exchange, equity and bond markets, not just in the UK but worldwide.

In minutes of this month’s interest rate decision, the Bank’s policymakers said it was “increasingly probable” that sterling could plummet sharply in the event of a Brexit and a vote to leave was the “largest immediate risk” to global financial markets.

Some banks have predicted a Brexit would see the pound fall to parity with the euro for the first time in history and as low as 1.20 US dollars.

