The EU referendum result should never have been this close

2016-06-23

 The referendum result should never have been this close. 

Remain should have won the argument on the first day and allowed us six weeks off.

Instead the country was mugged by Leave who fought one of the most dishonest, cynical and shameless election campaigns witnessed in a modern democracy.

They committed a crime against the voters and in doing so polluted not just our political discourse but the whole atmosphere of the country.

And it is time they were held responsible.

To understand this criminal act and the motivation of its perpetrators you have to go back to first principles.

The case for staying in the EU is simple. It shouldn't need spelling out but it does. And this is it: the prosperity of a nation rests on its ability to trade.

All the money we have comes from taxing firms on the profits they make from trading.

It pays for our schools, defence, police, hospitals, roads, libraries and infrastructure.

And these firms are more successful, create more profits and pay more taxes if Britain is in the EU.

We are richer because of our membership and we will be poorer if we leave.

You can haggle about precisely how much richer and how much poorer but this is the only argument that matters.

All other issues in the referendum campaign - immigration, sovereignty, security, jurisdiction - are secondary to this.

 Leave knew this. Michael Gove , Boris Johnson and Gisela Stuart have always known this. 

But they didn't want the voters to know this.

So they mugged us. They were helped by their accomplices in the right-wing press but they were also abetted by broadcasters having to show impartiality.

This meant the BBC, ITV, Channel 4 and Sky had to give equal airtime to both sides, regardless of the fact that one side was a Premier League outfit and the other a Sunday league team.

Leave's strategy was to do anything it could to distract attention from the fundamental argument that leaving the EU would be an act of economic suicide.

They deliberately pumped out misleading information in the knowledge that there would be endless debates about their lies rather than an analysis of the economic case.

This is why they had a bus wrongly claiming we give £350million a week to the EU.

It is why they put out leaflets and posters wrongly claiming Turkish membership of the EU was imminent and why they claimed Brussels was packed with 10,000 bureaucrats earning more than the Prime Minister.

Each of these is easy to pick apart. Our net contribution to the EU is around £190m a week, less than 1% of GDP and easily offset by the financial benefits of membership.

Turkish membership is not going to happen not least because France and other EU countries have repeatedly said they will veto it.

There are more than 10,000 public servants in the UK earning more than David Cameron so it is hardly surprising the Brussels civil service, serving 500million people, pays for expertise.

Leave wanted these points rebutted.

They wanted the TV debates dominated by discussions about immigration and Turkish membership.

They knew that every time Remain had to expose a lie, the lie itself gets a hearing.

It also meant voters were not hearing the only message that mattered: we would be poorer if we left.

There is not much to say in Nigel Farage's favour but at least his cut-price Donald Trump tribute act was blatant.

Leave spread their poison from the shadows.

Farage's Breaking Point poster was deeply offensive but it was not as insidiously cynical as putting out a leaflet warning of Turkish accession that highlighted its neighbours Iraq and Syria.

This was just as toxic and racist as anything distributed by UKIP.

It played on fears about Turkey, Islamophobia and the colour of people's skin.

Remember, Leave could have mentioned Serbia is also seeking EU membership.

They didn't because it would not have helped them tap into the racist vein they were trying to mainline.

It is no surprise that the referendum campaign has left Britain an uglier, unhappier place.

As Stephen Kinnock said is his Commons tribute to Jo Cox, rhetoric has consequences.

There is nothing lower than using race and immigration to exploit the genuine anxiety of those without a secure job or home who live in an area of fragile social cohesion.

There was no greater lie from Leave than its insinuation that leaving the EU would miraculously solve all these problems.

The Leave campaign will have consequences.

It has dragged down the terms of political debate, set a new low in how we conduct our politics and wilfully misled the voters.

In their desperation to win they played dirty. And in playing dirty they have soured our country.

Michael Gove, Boris Johnson and Gisela Stuart should look back on how they acted and be ashamed.

