A vote for Brexit is a vote for life – and if you’re in doubt, don't vote out

2016-06-18

 The final countdown to the biggest decision most of us will ever make is beginning 

 This week we will know if Britain is staying in the EU or leaving it for good, says the Sunday People . 

 David Cameron, Bank of England Governor Mark Carney and Barack Obama are among those urging us to stay. 

 Boris Johnson, Vladimir Putin and Donald Trump want us to leave. 

You must decide at the ballot box on Thursday which of those camps you want to be in.

That decision has been made all the more difficult by the uselessness of our politicians.

It has been one of the nastiest, most bitter, bad-tempered and inept campaigns in electoral history. An orgy of backbiting, exaggeration and lies.

 All sides, rightly, suspended campaigning as a mark of respect to Jo Cox after her appalling murder. 

When they resume to make their final ­arguments they should do so in a kinder, more reasonable way. That would be a fitting tribute to her memory.

 Read more: Jo Cox's death should cause politicians to reflect on vitriol of EU campaign 

The Prime Minister could have made a ­balanced case, but chose to make a hysterical one. He could have said that the British people are broadly better off inside Europe while ­acknowledging that Britain will not go down the toilet if we pull out.

 Instead he launched Project Fear predicting economic Armageddon after Brexit, and raising the spectre of nuclear holocaust to boot . 

Much blood was spilled in Europe last ­century, but now that old enemies France and Germany are firm friends, conflict between them this century is unthinkable.

Mr Cameron’s claim that every household would be £4,300 a year worse off was just ­jiggery-pokery – like working out the cost of a brick from the price of a house.

Boris Johnson promises economic nirvana outside Europe, and claims it costs ­£350million a week to stay in.

That’s like paying £3.50 for a box of chocolates and only getting the box.

So the figures trotted out in this campaign are as ridiculous as they are worthless.

The one thing Brexiteers and Remainers do agree on is that there will be economic turmoil if we leave.

  

For Mr Johnson that will be ­temporary. For Mr Cameron it would be ­permanent. If you are minded to leave, that’s the choice between short-term job losses or long-term unemployment.

Voting to stay would mean neither.

 Read more: Money Saving Expert Martin Lewis on the EU referendum 

If you are minded to leave, you might wish to listen to French National Front leader Marine Le Pen, who says: “It’s possible to live outside the EU.”

 If you’re minded to stay, you might take to heart Japan’s PM Shinzo Abe’s warning that a Britain outside the EU will be “a less attractive destination for Japanese investment”. 

What the argument whittles down to is ­whether you fear immigration more than the economic uncertainty of going it alone.

There is no question migrants are net ­contributors to the British economy. They pay £3billion in taxes and take out £500,000 in ­benefits. They give 6,000 times MORE than they receive.

But that may cut no ice if your job, your school place, or your GP appointment has been taken by a migrant.

 Brexiteers say the Eurozone crisis has proved we should never join the euro . 

But we are not going to join the euro.

So that shoots the hare that the Brexit ­scaremongers set running.

Still, out of the euro does not equate with ­being out of the EU.

Brexiteers put it about that if we vote no on Thursday the EU will come back with a better deal and we can vote yes in another referendum.

Do not believe it. Out means out. The result of this referendum is for life, not just until Christmas. David Cameron and the Tories are no friends of Sunday People readers.

We ­understand just how many of you feel discarded, disenfranchised and disenchanted.

The EU is less than perfect but that should not be an excuse to diss it.

This referendum is too important to be a verdict on Mr Cameron.

You may not feel you have a voice but you do have a vote. And on Thursday it counts as much as Mr Cameron’s does.

If you have decided how to cast it, all well and good. But as the final countdown begins if you are still uncertain then Brexit promises only more of that uncertainty.

So if in doubt, don’t vote out.

