Has Brexit put my job at risk? The facts and what you need to check now

2016-06-24

Leaving the EU has put jobs at risk. Everyone from car-plant workers in the North East to investment bankers in the City of London are potentially on the line as companies think about whether they still want to be based in Britain.

Other firms, dependant on trade, could see themselves cut off from their main markets or the price of the goods they need skyrocket as the pound falls.

There are also millions of EU citizens working in the UK without a UK passport, worried about their future rights.

People looking for work could also be hit, as companies slow down recruitment amidst the uncertainty or choose to hire elsewhere in the EU, rather than in Britain.

More than that, a whole string of our rights at work come directly from the EU – meaning even if your job is safe, you might get a lot less protection or even money as a result of the Brexit majority.

So what's on the line, and what can you do now to help? Mirror Money got hold of a series of employment experts to find out.

“Employers will have been making emergency plans for weeks and months; employees will no doubt feel less prepared for the impact a Brexit might have on their jobs and that reality is about to hit home,” said Aneil Balgobin, employment law solicitor at Simpson Millar.

"Employees in the sectors that will be affected immediately might want to dig out their employment contracts this weekend and update themselves with the most relevant paragraphs such as restrictive covenants and redundancy terms.”

"Employees who find themselves in a precarious situation - for example, having recently handed in their notice to join a business that could now be getting cold feet - should take urgent legal advice about the terms of their new job offer,” said Balgobin.

EU nationals who came to this country legally, under rules that existed when they arrived will not be made to leave, it has been confirmed.

The government has also said it will not make British businesses who currently have staff from other parts of Europe, give-up their workers.

“In employment we have three areas to consider,” said Martin Chitty, employment partner at Gowling WLG

These are, firstly, rights with no EU element. This covers unfair dismissal, discrimination on pay, sex, race, marriage, ethnicity and nationality. These won't change, Chitty explained.

Secondly there are rights based on EU policy, but enacted in the UK. These are unlikely to be removed, but may be get watered down.

Thirdly there are rights that are EU-based, but on the endangered list despite being in UK law.

“The issue here is going to be about the reforming zeal and position of the post-Brexit government,” Chitty said.

These are the working rights on the endangered list:

The rights in danger of being tweaked

There is, fortunately, some good news that's come out of all of this.

“In the immediate term, some employers who deferred recruitment during the referendum campaign may now start to hire if they decide they can wait no longer,” said Mariano Mamertino, economist at the global job site, Indeed.

Doug Monro – co-founder of jobs site Adzuna – was even more positive.

“It’s true, this is a new path and there are some risks. But that’s not the only way to look at this. We haven’t even started leaving yet – and the process is set to take years,” he said.

“We have a strong, open economy with a thriving tech sector.

“We will continue to drive growth and trade with the EU and other countries. No one in Brussels is arguing that Britain will have to leave that common market.

“The cloud’s silver lining is the potential for new skills to enter the UK, specifically via the potential introduction of an Australian-style points system. That could see more skilled immigrants coming to these shores, helping to fill the skills gap – boosting sectors like tech, engineering and science.”

