EU referendum results: Your comprehensive guide to how Britain voted in historic In/Out poll

2016-06-23

The results have been rolling in all night and Britain has voted for Brexit - you can catch up with the latest on our live blog here.

With results due between 12.30am and 7am, the question on everyone's lips was how to tell which way the wind is blowing.

By the time the overall result was declared in Manchester Town Hall the winner was already known by everyone.

So why was that the case?

Just like in a general election, it was important not to rely only on the total votes so far for each side.

Read more: 

At 7am (2 to declare)

Final

Final

At 5am

That's because support for Brexit and Remain vary so hugely in the 382 areas that are declaring.

We couldn't rely on the map of Britain either, or the number of pro- Brexit /pro-Remain areas because population varies massively across each area.

Instead we had to look out for "bellwether" areas where support is supposed to be even for each campaign.

If one side was repeatedly winning in those dead heat areas it would be a big sign.

That was exactly what happened in key bellwethers including Eden, Coventry and Lancaster.

We also looked at areas where Remain or Leave were meant to have strongholds to check their support is holding up.

We put together a list of these key seats below with the help of the University of East Anglia, which analysed thousands of results from the British Electoral Survey.

It looked at key factors like the type of voters who tend to swing to Brexit (older voters as opposed to younger ones for example).

We had to take it with a bucketload of salt.

That's because this sort of referendum has never happened before. We had nothing to compare it to. It's all estimates that could be very, very wrong.

Of course there is one much better way of knowing who's going to win.

Each of the 382 areas declared how many people have voted a couple of hours before they declared the result.

That meant broadcasters could call the referendum and we knew one side would officially have it once they passed 16.8million votes.

Leave also won in other Labour heartlands including Sunderland, Birmingham, Sheffield, Swansea, Darlington, Rotherham, Coventry and Stockton.

Remain won in big cities including Liverpool, Leeds, Glasgow and Edinburgh but turnout was not high enough to give Leave momentum.

Source: British Electoral Survey

1.30-3am: Islington is the first supposed Remain stronghold (66/23) with more than 100,000 voters due to declare.

1.45am: Daventry, East Midlands, is the first bellwether town to declare.

2.30am: Castle Point, Essex, is the first supposed Leave stronghold (59/25) to declare.

2.30am: Caerphilly in Wales is a big bellwether area with 130,000 voters. Which way is Wales swinging?

3am: Remain stronghold Cambridge (68/22) and Leave stronghold Boston (61/23) both due to declare.

3am: Bellwether areas are meant to be Pembrokeshire and Stratford-on-Avon.

3.30am: The most significant bellwether area of Lancaster which has 100,000 voters and each side on 42.8%. Eden is another dead heat bellwether around the same time.

3.30am: City of Edinburgh is the most pro-Remain area (69/21) and also one of the biggest by population in the country. Scotland should be shoring up the Remain vote big time if In is to win.

4am: Coventry is a the second-biggest bellwether by population with 220,000 voters signed up for the referendum. The biggest, Cheshire East, is only due to declare at 7am. Also look out for Mendip where it's all in the balance too.

4-5am: Northern Ireland is the biggest area by population with 1.26million voters.

4.30am: Broxtowe, East Midlands, is the third of three dead heat areas due to declare.

5am: We get a glut of what should be Brexit strongholds although the result may already be clear by this point. Fenland is the biggest Brexit area in the country (62/23) but we also have Gravesham (57/29), South Holland (62/25) and Great Yarmouth (59/26) to look out for.

