Scared Brits panic buy euros and dollars – are they right to?

2016-06-22

The pound crashed against the euro and the dollar when the Leave campaign too the lead in the polls, only to surge again in the past few days as report for the Remain campaign grew stronger.

“If the UK votes to ‘Leave’ the EU on Thursday, the pound will most likely nosedive in the short term, with many warning an ‘out’ result could trigger a 15% to 20% cent fall in the value of the pound," said Chris Towner, chief economist at currency firm HiFX.

"However, we also know that if the UK votes to stay in the EU, the pound should recover most – or all – of the losses it’s made in recent months."

But for people going on holiday this summer, does this surge mean you should Buy! Buy! Buy! now, or would you be better off waiting until the result of Thursday's referendum on whether the UK should stay in the EU or go it alone?

EU Referendum countdown

The good news is that whether we stay or go, MoneySavingExpert's Martin Lewis has found a way to lock in today's rate (in case of a crash) but still be able to benefit if the pound rises instead.

That's because at least three of the big bureaux de change - Sainsbury’s Bank (collection only), Post Office (collection and delivery) and Travelex (collection only) - let you to buy currency at today’s prices to collect in the next 7-60 days.

The crucial point though is that they also let you to cancel the order, sometimes for a full refund, as long as you give 24 hours’ notice.

That means if we do vote "remain" and the pound rises again, you can cancel your purchase and take full advantage of the new, higher rates.

"This trick we’ve come up with, whilst not getting you the very best rates on the market, allows you to get decent rates with big bureaux with the safety of knowing whatever happens you can’t lose,” MoneySavingExpert.com founder Martin Lewis said.

 No matter what happens on Thursday, you need to make sure you're not being ripped off on the exchange rate you're getting.

Here are FairFX's tips on getting the best exchange rate you can:

 Track currency: Set up a currency tracker which will alert you to good rates. 

 Lock-in rates: If you know you’re travelling later this year, plan ahead. Pre-load a prepaid currency card to lock in rates and protect yourself from any potential further decline. If you’re happy with the current rate on offer, buy your currency now to guarantee that rate for your future holiday. 

 Look further afield: While Europe is a popular holiday destination, you can get more bang for your buck by shopping around. This includes looking at destinations which offer better value over the long term such as include South Africa, Canada, Russia, Zambia and Argentina – offering up to 60% more for your pound compared to last year. 

 Buy wisely: Don’t leave changing your travel money until the last minute. Exchange rates at airports can be over 10% more expensive meaning you could lose £100 of cash for every £1,000 you change. 

 Stay alert: Once you’re abroad, beware of the double exchange rate dupe. If you let the seller in a shop or restaurant covert the price back into pounds, they will choose their own exchange rate and you’re more likely to be on the less favourable end of the deal. 

 Cards: Debit and credit cards are good backups but beware of ATM and transaction fees as well as what exchange rate you’ll be forced to use. Instead, use a specialist currency card or a card designed for overseas spending. 

 Always use local currency: If you have the option of paying – or withdrawing cash – in pounds rather than the local currency, always say no. This allows the other party to decide the exchange rate, a process known as Dynamic Currency Conversion, and it’s unlikely the rate will be in your favour! 

 Different money habits: Check out any travel money anomalies before you travel. Some countries, such as Iran, won’t accept UK cards in their ATMs. And in America, for example, you definitely need to remember your PIN – outlets are migrating from swipe & sign to chip & pin so don’t get caught out. 

