UK holidaymakers in Greece are refused cash exchange or withdrawal after Brexit

2016-06-24

 Brits abroad in Greece have claimed they were refused cash withdrawals and exchanges as they were told there was no official rate available following the Brexit win today. 

Holidaymakers in Kos were reportedly told they can't access their funds as there was no rate set by the Central European Bank.

 This morning the value of the pound dropped against the US dollar and the Euro. 

 This comes as the UK voted to leave the EU in a campaign backed by Nigel Farage and Boris Johnson. 

 A sign posted outside one resort noted that British or Scottish pounds couldn't be exchanged, reports the Sun . 

And others said how they weren't able to draw money out from their British bank accounts.

Matt Rooney tweeted: "It’s beginning already!

"We’re in Greece, no cash exchange & no cash machine withdrawals for Brits. Great #brexitfail"

He posted a picture of the sign at the Blue Lagoon Resort this morning informing guests they couldn't access their money.

 Read more: 

It read: "Dear guests, we would like to inform you that we cannot exchange British or Scottish Pounds at the moment, as we do not have an official exchange rate from the central bank.

"Thank you for your understanding!"

Mr Rooney confirmed he was later able to withdraw cash, before he said his local exchange centre was accepting transfers again.

Yesterday, a majority vote saw Brits decide to leave the European Union.

In unprecedented scenes, the value of £1 tumbled more than 10 US cents to $1.33 in just a few hours.

The pound also was down just under 5% at 1.250 against the Euro - which itself has fallen against other currencies.

Alex Edwards, head of dealing desk at UKForex, said: "The pound has recovered off of this morning's low.

 Read more: 

"Carney offered some reassurance to a market desperate for. it The US reaction will be interesting, and we could still see fresh lows in the pound today."

One pound will now buy you 1.22 Euros, which means holidaymakers travelling to Eurozone countries will get significantly less when exchanging money.

