Queues as panic-buyers stock up on euros and dollars ahead of possible Brexit

2016-06-22

Holidaymakers heading abroad this summer have been flocking to snap up their travel money ahead of the EU vote.

Post Office Travel Money, which accounts for one in four of all UK foreign exchange transactions, said currency sales overall have surged by 74% year-on-year since the weekend.

It said on Tuesday that Post Office branch sales were up by 48.8% on the same period a year ago, while online purchases were up by 381%.

Meanwhile online travel money firm FairFX has seen transactions surge an astonishing 300% compared to the same time last week.

The value of the pound has see-sawed amid the uncertainty over whether the UK will decide to remain in the EU or vote for a Brexit.

The pound has made some gains in recent days, rebounding from two-month lows against the dollar and the euro a week ago when Brexit concerns sent it plunging.

There have been warnings that a Brexit vote could trigger further falls in the pound - and some holidaymakers may be hedging their bets by changing their money ahead of the vote.

The Post Office saw a spike in currency sales over the late May Bank Holiday weekend and it said the pattern of growth has continued since then.

Post Office Travel Money said in a statement: "Currency sales remain buoyant and are up 36% year-on-year for June to date in Post Office branches, online and through purchases on its pre-paid travel money card.

"This rises to a dramatic growth of 154% for currency purchases made online - the majority of this for euros and US dollars."

The Post Office said it is stocked up and has ready availability of euros for purchase in its branches and online.

However, while holidaymakers are spending their lunch breaks in queues, British business has taken the opposite approach.

"On the corporate side, FairFX, has seen a significant drop in clients booking forward contracts over the last few months," said Ian Strafford-Taylor – chief executive of currency firm FairFX .

"This potentially signals a sentiment from clients that a Remain vote will win so they’re happy to wait before hedging their future requirements and exposure."

And the people holding off are expecting big things if the UK votes to stay in the EU on Thursday.

"While it is impossible to predict, the behaviour we’ve seen with optimistic clients and strong momentum from the Remain campaign seems to have clients confident the pound will see a relief rally following a clear win for Remain," he said.

"Some suggest we could see the Pound strengthen as much as 5% following the results from Thursday’s referendum."

