How will my MP vote in the EU referendum? Search our full list by name or constituency

2016-06-21

The EU referendum is nearly here - and although they get no more say than the rest of us, we all want to know what our MPs think.

It's good news for David Cameron , who now has a clear majority of Tories in Parliament backing his pro-Brussels fight.

But more than 130 Tories still want Out including 17 ministers - and they're joined by at least 10 members for Labour.

So what's your MP's view? Which Labour MPs back Brexit ? How are the Tories split - and who's keeping mum?

We compiled a painstaking search tool from letters, statements, tweets, local press, campaigns, debates and where that fails, calling the MPs themselves.

More than 200 Labour MPs joined the party's In For Britain group way back in November, but at least 10 are planning to vote Out.

They include maverick Beast of Bolsover Dennis Skinner, Work and Pensions Committee chairman Frank Field and Parliamentary Labour Party chairman John Cryer.

Some Tories are only planning to reveal their views after they hold public debates.

Others, like Treasury committee chairman Andrew Tyrie, may keep tight-lipped for the rest of the campaign.

Read more: 

Mirror analysis from June 2016

Mirror analysis from June 2016

Tories (9): Anne Milton, Caroline Ansell*, Charlotte Leslie, Eleanor Laing (Deputy Spe

aker), Huw Merriman*, Ian Liddell-Grainger, Jesse Norman, Pauline Latham, Tracey Crouch

Labour (3): John Spellar, Lindsay Hoyle (Deputy Speaker), Natascha Engel (Deputy Speaker)

Speaker (1): John Bercow

* Plan to declare at a later date.

1. Dennis Skinner

2. Frank Field

3. Gisela Stuart

4. Graham Stringer

5. John Cryer

6. Kate Hoey

7. Kelvin Hopkins

8. Roger Godsiff

9. Ronnie Campbell

10. John Mann

1. Mike Penning

2. John Hayes

3. James Duddridge

4. Michael Gove*

5. Dominic Raab

6. Penny Mordaunt

7. Julian Brazier

8. Priti Patel**

EU Referendum countdown

9. Justin Tomlinson

10. Chris Grayling*

11. Desmond Swayne

12. Theresa Villiers*

13. George Eustice

14. Mark Francois

15. James Wharton

16. John Whittingdale*

17. Andrea Leadsom

Ministers undeclared: Mark Lancaster, Tracey Crouch

* Cabinet ministers **Attends Cabinet

SNP: Every one of its 54 MPs support Remain

Lib Dems: The party has been fiercely pro-EU for decades

Greens: Sole MP Caroline Lucas backs Remain

Ukip: Sole MP Douglas Carswell backs Leave (obviously)

Plaid Cymru: The Welsh nationalists back Remain

Northern Ireland: Sinn Féin, the SDLP, UUP and Alliance Party back Remain. The DUP backs Leave.

Independents: Westminster's only true independent Sylvia Hermon backs Remain

Suspended: Simon Danczuk and Naz Shah (ex-Lab) and Michelle Thomson and Natalie McGarry (ex- SNP ) all thought to back Remain

By-election: Tooting elects a new MP to replace Sadiq Khan on June 16.

If you believe an entry needs correcting or updating, please e-mail tips (with evidence if possible) to dan.bloom[at]mirror.co.uk.

