Jo Cox's death and why we have to take our country back

2016-06-17

The death of Jo Cox will be used for many things in the coming days.

It's par for the course when you live and die in public life, and sometimes even when you don't.

So there will be some who say that because an MP was killed, MPs should be kept away from the people.

There will be others who reckon her death means we should Vote Remain, and others who think it means we should definitely Brexit.

Some will say that because the man who killed her reportedly shouted "Britain first" as she was shot and stabbed, the referendum made him do it.

Others will insist anyone who commits such a crime he must be mad, and that the government should never allow such people to walk the streets.

Another MP will claim it's down to media demonisation of our political classes; the media will say it's down to duplicitous politicians earning a bad name for everyone else.

Many will forget that she was an innocent civilian cut down on a street she should have been safe in.

And that in a darkened home last night a husband had to find the words to tell a boy and a girl aged three and five why mummy wasn't coming home.

The truth is we live in a deeply divided country - more harshly and unhappily split than it's been since the war with the trade unions I can only vaguely recall from my childhood.

I don't know how we got here, and nor does anyone else. But somehow, perhaps through a combination of all the things people will use Jo's death to argue about, it's where we are.

There is a deep disgust for politicians that still lingers from the 2009 expenses scandal, in the same way that phone-hacking and Mid-Staffs has turned into a disdain for journalists and nurses long after those horrors were over.

But while they merely make people stop buying newspapers or take their own food into hospital, the lack of faith in politics disengages us from our fellow man altogether.

It means we don't vote. Only two-thirds of those who could did so in 2015, compared to 76% in 1979. And in the European Parliament elections - you remember, the body we're told is undemocratic - it's usually around a third.

It means that people stop caring about what happens both to others and to themselves.

It is now socially acceptable to call your MP a whore or threaten to rape a footballer's family - or at least, not something that's socially UN acceptable.

It means that literate people with the wit to run their own company don't care who makes their laws and simply want to withdraw themselves.

The isolationism makes it easier to hate the other; to glare from your windows at a neighbour rather than remonstrate with them.

It makes people say the other side are sneering. It means "liberal" is an insult along with "Tory", "feminist", "white male" and every other previously-harmless human category.

If you've been successful you're too rich to care. If you're clever you're told we don't want experts.

It has even got to the point where publicly doing something for the benefit of others is attacked as "virtue-signalling".

And those who are attacked then attack right back. Feminists arguing for the right to be heard call the police to shut someone up.

Members of the Labour Party work hard to oppress others and one nation Tories tell us there's two.

And in huge numbers people vote for those who preach being apart; for those who say they're your only friend because everyone else hates you.

This isn't a British problem. It's across the Western world, from Trump to Le Pen via the Golden Dawn to a man who yesterday saw nothing amiss in standing in front of this picture.

There's nothing Nazi about voting UKIP or to leave the EU. The party was founded by sane, intelligent individuals with a point to make.

It's just that today the best way to get us lot to the ballot box is to scream "IT'S THEIR FAULT!" at us until we're so filled with prejudice we march to the polling station purely out of hate.

And as Jo's widower said yesterday: "Hate doesn't have a creed, race or religion. It is poisonous."

It's poisoned us. It's poisoned our country and our outlook and our way of going about the day.

The reasons for Jo's death are yet to be revealed. But it won't be due to any one of the reasons you'll be given.

There are millions of mentally ill people who aren't a danger. There's no earthly reason a referendum should make anyone kill.

It's not due to the expenses scandal or the media or trolling people on Twitter.

Those are the symptoms, not the cause.

It is the national disengagement which killed Jo and is killing us too. It's killing our trust, our hope, our participation in all the things that matter.

Vote however you please, but VOTE . Argue with whoever you like, but ARGUE .

A great nation is one that does not curl in on itself, chewing its own entrails in the way we are. A great nation opens its mind and wonders what it's like to be the other guy.

I am wondering what it's like to kill Jo Cox. How ill and confused, how scared and afraid anyone would need to be to see a woman who was going to turn 42 next week, who had been in Parliament a little over a year but had held the Prime Minister to account over the plight of refugees, a woman who had harmed no-one, and think the best thing to do was hurt her.

But there is hope, and it lies in all of you who heard the news of Jo's death and stopped. It's in the people who watched the news aghast, who laid flowers and went to vigils and told their children a bad thing had happened.

In Jo's death there is a way to re-engage because it unites us in noticing just how bad things have become.

Do not despair, for down that path there is only more of what we've already had too much of.

If we notice the divide and refuse to be part of it, play our parts however small, the poison will have no place to be.

Please vote. Please read the news. Please care what happens to us and not just to you. The world is full of decent and good people doing their best, and now that we're one down we all need to work harder.

We all want our country back - heart and soul.

