Listen to your children and grandchildren before casting EU Referendum vote

2016-06-19

These are extraordinary political times, even without the killing of an MP in the street outside her constituency surgery.

On Thursday the British people vote in a referendum after which, if the polls are accurate, nothing will ever be the same.

The long campaign has been unpleasant and at times unbelievable.

Our membership of the European Union did not use to be of much interest to most voters but it has now suddenly become a subject of deep passion on both sides.

Just about every leading politician in this country and around the world, every economist, every financial organisation, every trade union and every big business leader have said it would be a terrible mistake for us to get out of the EU.

And yet at least half the voters – the only people who matter on Thursday – don’t believe them.

That is to a great extent because we have come to believe that those advocating Remain are only in it for themselves.

The death of the MP Jo Cox has shown us horribly clearly that is not so. There are politicians who are totally committed to serving the people and doing what is in our best interests.

Read more: The A - Z of who wants us to Remain and who is backing Brexit

Yet who are we supposed to trust?

It is understandable to be cynical about the motives of those who form the various branches of the Establishment.

So let us suggest a different approach for what is a very different electoral test. Why not trust your children and grandchildren?

Divisions in this campaign cut across most divides but the most significant is that between ages.

Older people tend to lean towards Leave while the young are more likely to opt for Remain, as today’s Sunday Mirror’s report confirms.

Every election involves a decision about the future but this referendum will decide it in the most fundamental way.

Its result will affect today’s young people profoundly and long after their elders have gone.

The youth of Britain already face huge obstacles which did not affect their parents and grandparents, including gloomy job prospects and the struggle to get on the housing ladder.

Surely they are entitled to want this country to have the stability which they believe remaining in the EU is more likely to bring?

EU Referendum countdown

The Sunday Mirror cannot tell you how to vote on Thursday.

But we do ask you to listen to your children and grandchildren before making up your minds.

