Brexit decision 'devastating' for UK's creative sector says industry chief - and it's bad news for Game of Thrones

2016-06-24

The decision for Britain to leave the European Union following yesterday's referendum has been described as "devastating" to our TV and film industry.

The chairman of the Independent Film and Television Alliance (IFTA), speaking to Variety, explained the uncertain future of the creative sector.

"The decision to exit the European Union is a major blow to the UK film and TV industry," said Michael Ryan.

"Producing films and television programs is a very expensive and very risky business and certainty about the rules affecting the business is a must.”

Many prominent actors, including Keira Knightly, Benedict Cumberbatch and Jude Law were against Britain leaving, and signed a letter saying it would damage the creative industries.

"This decision has just blown up our foundation," Mr Ryan continued.

"As of today, we no longer know how our relationships with co-producers, financiers and distributors will work, whether new taxes will be dropped on our activities in the rest of Europe or how production financing is going to be raised without any input from European funding agencies.

"The UK creative sector has been a strong and vibrant contributor to the economy — this is likely to be devastating for us."

Some productions, including the American-made HBO series Game of Thrones, receive cultural subsidies from the EU's regional development fund to film in its locations.

Game of Thrones is filmed in Northern Ireland, where the rugged scenery doubles for Westeros.

That means that local creative jobs involved in the production - from costume designers to caterers - benefit from the series being based there. If it were to leave in order to stay in the EU, many people would find themselves affected.

"It might be up in the air for US studios who want to film in the UK," said Peter Chase, a senior fellow at the German Marshall Fund of the United States' Brussels office, told Foreign Policy .

"There are EU programs to help fund all of this. If the UK is no longer part of the EU, that has the potential to go away."

It remains to be seen whether the government, or outside sponsors, will be able to offer a similar reimbursement. Otherwise, TV and film companies may start looking elsewhere for production purposes.

