Eight foreign voices on their future in the UK: 'We're shocked and scared'

2016-06-24

 The Brexit vote has left EU workers in Britain shocked and scared. Here are their thoughts on their future in the UK: 

 Marta Tomczak, 31, is a Polish factory worker who has lived in Manchester for four years. 

“I am really unhappy with the results of the referendum. I am actually really scared about what’s going to happen. I’m worried everything is going to become even more expensive if a trade deal can’t be negotiated.

“I feel European and like I was living in a European country but is this not true anymore?

“I understand British people’s concerns about immigration but the EU has helped me come to this country and get a job here too, and British people have that freedom to travel and work in Europe too. It’s a good thing.”

 Tanja Stuckel, 30, is a writer from Germany and has lived here since November. 

“We’re all genuinely shocked. We didn’t want this to happen. We didn’t want the UK to leave our Union. What is going to happen to us now? No-one knows. People in Germany are very upset, I’m upset. My boyfriend is from the UK and he says he feels ashamed.”

 Daniele Palumbo, 28, is a data analyst from Sicily, Italy. 

“The result leaves me speechless. I’ve followed closely the campaigns in the last months finding half truths and lies in both sides. I hoped that the UK could have understand the importance of its role inside the Union.

“The UK really could have helped to reform the EU from inside. What really scares me is that the future is now a black hole: British citizens have voted something without knowing the consequences and the future plans. I thought that I could consider the UK my home. Apparently I was wrong.”

 Marta Jansa Perez, a 49-year-old mum of two from Spain, works in IVF treatment at Hammersmith Hospital. 

“I feel very disappointed with the outcome. As a European citizen living in the UK for the last 14 years I always felt welcome and happy to contribute with my work and as a member of the community and delighted that my children would grow up in such a multicultural and tolerant society.

“It is a shame that in spite of having all the same rights as UK nationals Europeans born in other countries and living in the UK did not have the right to express our opinion on this matter.”

 Nicolas Chrysostomou, 68, is a Greek-Cypriot and owns an electrics shop in North London. 

“Only time will tell what will happen but I’m not worried. I’ve lived here for more than 40 years and I don’t see my rights changing. But it’s business as usual for me. I voted Remain but we needed change and the EU needed change.”

 Norina Tommassini, 61, is an Italian waitress who has lived in the UK for 40 years. 

“It’s heartbreaking really and no-one knows what’s going to happen. I have lived here for 40 years, I am a UK citizen, but I don’t know what my future holds here anymore. We just don’t understand what’s going to happen to us and what our rights will be anymore. I’m devastated.”

 Katie Monnelly, 29, is a speech and language therapist from Dublin and now lives in Stoke Newington. 

“I’m really sad and disappointed with the result today. I’ve made Britain my home for the last four years and I love it here. This result just makes me feel slightly less welcome. I worry about the knock on effect.

“I’m especially thinking of the EU border that will now come up between Ireland and Northern Ireland. The country is too small for those kind of borders. I fear it will reignite old arguments.”

 Virginia V. Hartmann, 25, is a German actress and translator based in Glasgow. 

“I have lived in the UK on-and-off for a total of six years. That is not enough to qualify for a British citizenship. I have spent most of my adult life in the UK, it is a place I call home, and I am scared.

“I feel less welcome here and I am worried about how this vote will affect my work and living situation. To me, Leave meant casting your vote for the far-right, racism and xenophobia.

 “We live in very uncertain and dark times and this result has solidified this. I certainly do not look forward to the domino effect Brexit might have on the EU. All I can hope for at this point is a second Scottish independence referendum.“ 

