'Brexit is one good way to cut out our sugar intake': Mirror readers react to UK leaving EU

2016-06-24

For better or for worse, the United Kingdom has chosen to leave the European Union.

With so much hanging in the balance, it's certainly the most talked about event of the year - and rightly so, as it's the most important decision the British people have had to make in decades.

Our readers have been discussing all the issues related to us leaving the EU too - ranging from important issues like Brexit's affect on our economy, rights and benefits and Nicola Sturgeon vowing for a second Scottish Independence referendum, to less important issues like the sale of chocolate products outside of the EU.

Here's some of what our readers have had to say on those issues and more. Be sure to join in on the discussions yourself!

BillyJeffs:'By the way, who is going to have to pay for our new passports and new driving licenses...?'

Efjay:'I am waiting to see if the UK is forced into costly WTO trade rules, or accepts the only option on the table - the EEA path - in or out of EFTA.'

Chunkie:'If Gibraltarians want to remain British, then they must accept the referendum result. However, if they wish to part from Britain that is also their right. But if they do so they will be quickly annexed by Spain. Britain has a duty to protect Gibraltar from Spain and we must stand by them.'

Victoria1889:'Gibraltar people want to stay in the EU, they deserve their democratic right too. Don't force their will to stay within the UK.'

Buddy05: 'One good way to cut out our sugar intake'.

MarkNorville: 'You do not have enough knowledge of the EU or politics. We voted for your future. What life experience have you got to tell us how to vote? The happiest day of my life.'

MrsJones:'Sorry to upset the youngsters, but I expect you have hardly put any £ in the pot.'

AustynCornwell:'When you've entered the real world and not still wrapped up in cotton wool in the education system, then you will be given the chance to vote.'

MarianneRibes:'That's stupid you have Euros in stock, you have a rate, you can't refuse to sell them if the person is a customer. Obviously anyone with commonsense got their holiday currency last week.'

Armand1952: 'What about the pensioners living in Spain who rent properties here? Are the government going to find us homes in England? Once our medical cover is stopped we'll no longer be able to live here.'

HarrySlider:'Absolutely pathetic. Democracy doesn't work by who shouts the loudest. It works by the number of votes. You don't keep voting till you get the answer you want.'

Loopy77:'Definitely agree with a 2nd referendum. Need a bigger majority or the country is going to be split and that will cause nothing but trouble.'

Abdelhasem:'A restriction on young European players gives a welcome boost to young British hopefuls in the UK system.'Alphonso:'More welcome would be having more young British hopefuls of high enough technical ability to break through despite the best efforts of the best of Europe's youngsters, and not just because the competition has been excluded.'

Dave227:'The benefits must be capped so that those on benefits never have a better lifestyle than those on minimum wage - otherwise, everybody would choose benefits.'

Rachaelmcl:'We don't have money to help the vulnerable, but we have billions to bomb innocent countries at a whim and build unnecessary nuclear bombs. People need to stop arguing 'give us our freedom, give us control', and realise Brexit is 'give the tories our freedom, give the tories control.'Gilgamesh:'Well we are here now, got to get the corrupt government out and more liberals in.'

PeteWallace:'I hope they go, then the money used to subsidise them can be used for other things.'

GeorgiosG:'Like it or not, Ms. Nicola Sturgeon inspires more confidence than the Whitehall gang.'

