Putting a price on the truth: Mirror Politics EU referendum morning briefing

2016-06-21

We are nearing the endgame.

 Some may feel they have heard every argument there is to hear on the EU referendum. 

 Others are still going through the agonising process of deciding which way to vote. 

Despite weeks of intense campaigning the central messages remain unchanged.

 It is a battle between an emotional case for sovereignty and a level-headed warning of the economic consequences of Brexit. 

Swirling around these two fundamentals are debates about immigration, internationalism, security and patriotism.

 There are sub plots about the Tory leadership and Jeremy Corbyn's commitment to the EU cause. 

And there are mini psychodramas about Dave falling out with his mates.

But the core arguments at the beginning of the campaign are the same ones at the end of the campaign.

And expect to hear them repeated unremittingly over the next 48 hours.

 The big set piece is tonight's BBC extravaganza at Wembley with Boris Johnson, Andrea Leadsom and Gisela Stuart making the case for Brexit and Sadiq Khan, Frances O'Grady and Ruth Davidson batting for Remain. 

My hunch is Davidson, the Scottish Tory leader, could be the star of the night. She has the common touch of Boris but none of his buffoonery.

Labour is also planning a referendum blitz today with Jeremy Corbyn holding a rally in Manchester and all the living former leaders - Neil Kinnock, Harriet Harman, Ed Miliband and Gordon Brown - on the campaign trail.

 Tony Blair is at a funeral but has made his contribution with an article in the Mirror today . 

 We also have the former bosses of the major supermarkets warning that "prices will rise" if we vote for Brexit. 

And 12 Nobel Prize winning economists and 150 leading economists say that a vote to leave is likely to tip the country into recession.

 If that has not scared you sufficiently then George Soros is saying the shock of Brexit could be worse than Black Wednesday. 

The stock response to these warnings is "these are the same people who said we should go into the euro".

In some cases that is true but in most cases it is not.

 * If you would like the newsletter sent to your inbox sign up here : http://www.mirror.co.uk/newsletters/politics-newsletter/ 

