3 Brexit promises campaigners had wriggled out of before breakfast on EU referendum results day

2016-06-24

The world of politics moves fast.

Yesterday, David Cameron was Prime Minister and Britain was a member of the European Union.

This morning, before most people had eaten breakfast, it became clear both of those things will soon be untrue.

And the world moves just as quickly for Brexit campaigners.

They've spent weeks making promises and pledges about what the world is going to be like when we break free from the shackles of the European Union.

Immigration will be lower, they said. We'll have £350m a week extra to spend on the NHS, they said.

Read more: Live Brexit fallout: David Cameron out, Jeremy Corbyn under pressure while Nicola Sturgeon plans second Scottish referendum

And because it's the democratic will of the British people, they said we'll go to Brussels straight away to invoke article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty, which would trigger our escape from the EU.

By 8am this morning, senior Leave campaigners had already rowed back on all three of those pledges.

Here's how that happened.

Nigel Farage told Good Morning Britain it was a "mistake" for the Leave campaign to claim there'd be £350m a week extra for the NHS after Brexit .

Asked to guarantee that money would go to the NHS he said: "No, and I would never have made that claim. That was one of the mistakes that the Leave campaign made."

He went on to say the UK now has a "£10billion a year featherbed, that will be free money that we can spend on the NHS, on schools, on whatever it is."

Speaking on BBC News this morning, Tory MEP Daniel Hannan said: "People are grown up and they understand this isn't something that can happen tomorrow.

"No one has ever suggested there is going to be no immigration.

"There will be EU nationals watching this programme now and I want to underline - no one has suggested any change in their status.

Read more: Nigel Farage previously said he would want a second referendum if Remain won by a narrow margin

"In terms of migration from the EU the one thing we can do as a result is we will no longer be citizens of the European Union.

"If people watching think that they have voted and there is now going to be zero immigration from the EU they are going to be disappointed

"Of course there is still going to be immigration. There are still going to be people coming here to work and you will look in vain for anything the Leave campaign said at any point that suggested there would be any kind of border closure or pulling up of the drawbridge.

"All we're asking for is some control over roughly who comes in.

Brexit campaigner Dr Liam Fox said: "A lot of things were said in advance of this referendum that we might want to think about again and that (invoking article 50) is one of them.

"I think that it doesn't make any sense to trigger article 50 without having a period of reflection first, for the Cabinet to determine exactly what it is that we're going to be seeking and in what timescale.

"And then you have to also consider what is happening with the French elections and the German elections next year and the implications that that might have for them.

"So a period of calm, a period of reflection, to let it all sink in and to work through what the actual technicalities are."

