Schoolboy begs mum to vote Remain after ‘confusing’ assembly left him thinking pals would be deported

2016-06-22

 A schoolboy has begged his mother to vote for Britain to stay in the EU after a 'confusing' assembly left him thinking his pals would be forced to leave the country. 

 Keely Barnes says Harry, eight, is now worried classmates from foreign countries will be sent home in the event of a Brexit . 

 She says the Newall Green Primary School pupil, from Manchester, got the idea after an assembly to explain the EU referendum. 

And he even feared he might have to leave the country himself, along with his mum and six-year-old brother Billy.

But school bosses say Harry got the wrong end of the stick and that the school assembly was a completely neutral discussion to explain to children the important nature of the vote.

 However, Keely claims the EU referendum is too complex a subject for primary school children which has left her son scared and bamboozled, reports Manchester Evening News. 

  

  

She said: “I’m disgusted about it. They are completely confused.

“They should not have been told this. I’m disgusted at the teachers having this assembly. It’s far too much for young kids to comprehend.”

 Keely, 28, claims that Harry and Billy came home and begged her to vote to remain in the EU fearing for the future of school pals whose families come from other countries. 

She said: “The kids were having their tea and Harry said ‘mum, you really need to vote for us to stay in’.

"I was so shocked because I have never voted in my life and I keep that stuff away from the kids.

“Apparently the teacher said that if the adults don’t vote in all the children will be sent home.

“We just got a new house six months ago and he was crying saying we would have to leave it.

“The school have twisted their minds. The words were ‘tell your adults to vote in’.

“Harry has got a Russian friend and a Nigerian friend at school and he is now thinking ‘Where are they going to go?’”

 Read more: 

Kelly had not initially planned to vote in the referendum but now says she will be voting to leave.

She added: “If they think that I have to vote to stay in the country what on earth has been said in that assembly?”

Another mum, whose daughter attends the school, said her six-year-old daughter was ‘very confused’ by the assembly.

The mum, who asked not to be named, said: “I just think it’s ridiculous. We didn’t know anything about it until she came home from school. She said her friends ‘have got to go’.

“They were told that we must vote ‘in’ otherwise our friends can’t stay here.”

Millions of Britons will go to the polls on Thursday to voting on the Britain's place in the EU.

 Read more: 

But deputy head Faik Kordemir said it was all just a misunderstanding and it was an important, relevant topic for teachers to address.

He said: “We reject any suggestion that the content of our assembly was political or in any way inappropriate.

"It looks instead very much as if there has been a misunderstanding between what was actually said in school and how this was retold at home.

 “The fact is that all schools are obliged to include citizenship in their curriculum, and following lots of questions from children to their teachers about the EU Referendum we decided to use this as an opportunity to teach them about elections and how they work. 

 “This was very much an age appropriate session explaining the mechanics of elections and voting, and was completely neutral with absolutely no political content whatsoever. 

“I’m sure everyone would agree that as the adults of the future, teaching children about the importance of democracy and freedom of choice is a positive, and something that should be encouraged.

“The children were all really interested in the session and very much enjoyed it.”

