Britain votes for Brexit in historic EU referendum that threatens the breakup of the nation

2016-06-24

Britain has voted to leave the European Union after 43 years in an astonishing referendum that threatens the breakup of the nation.

Politicians in Scotland and Northern Ireland demanded breakaway votes as dawn broke on the reality that Britain had chosen Brexit.

Polls at 10pm giving Remain the edge led to false hope and even a semi-admission of defeat by Nigel Farage.

But Labour heartlands like Sunderland, Birmingham, Swansea, Darlington, Sheffield, Rotherham, Coventry and Stockton - along with 17 of 22 areas in Wales - all voted Out.

As the results rolled in the pound tumbled to its lowest level against the dollar since 1985 - losing 15 cents in just a few hours.

It left a deeply Disunited Kingdom Northern Ireland, 28 of 33 London areas and all 32 areas in Scotland backed Remain. Sinn Fein called for a vote on a united Ireland and the SNP threatened a second Scottish independence referendum.

Read more: 

A week after MP Jo Cox was shot dead, Nigel Farage claimed he had won "without a single bullet being fired" and said he hoped the entire European Union would collapse.

Despite 86 Tory MPs signing a letter vowing to keep David Cameron as Prime Minister, anonymous calls for he and Chancellor George Osborne to quit as the sun rose on Friday.

A dramatic and nerve-wracking night saw the early results go in favour of Leave - despite the polls predicting a Remain win.

While London and Scotland voted overwhelmingly in favour of UK membership, vast swathes of country, especially in the Labour heartlands, angrily turned on the establishment and vented their anger at immigration by backing Brexit.

By 3pm, an analysis of the 100 of the 382 results that had been declared pointed to a 75% chance of Brexit - a disastrous result for David Cameron and raising a huge question mark over the PM’s future.

The prospect of Leave winning caused carnage on the markets and saw the pound suffer its steepest fall for decades.

The early confidence of Remain evaporated as area after area went for Leave, making a mockery of Nigel Farage’s close of polls prediction that Remain would edge it.

The broken state of the UK was revealed as Wales, most of the north of England and much of the Midlands went for Brexit .

In an ominous sign for Remain the national turnout was predicted to be 72% - boosted by more people turning out to support Leave.

The mood of the night was set by the result in the Labour stronghold of Sunderland which voted by 61.3% (82,394) to 38.7% (51,930) for out.

The cities of Sheffield, Nottingham and Coventry also voted out. Sheffield went 51% to 49% for leave.

The bellwether seats of Eden in Cumbria and Caerphilly and Wrexham in Wales also all went for Leave.

All needed to go Remain to indicate there would be a vote to stop the UK leaving the EU.

The pattern was repeated across Middle England and the Midlands, with Malvern Hills, Telford, Rugby and Lincoln favouring Brexit .

Labour MP Jonathan Reynolds said the “overwhelming strength of feeling on immigration” had “trumped” all other issues.

Underlining how divided the country had become, Glasgow voted 2-1 to stay, while Remain outperformed in the inner London boroughs of Islington, Lambeth and Lewisham.

The recriminations among Remain started early with Lib Dem Vince Cable saying David Cameron had made a “very bad judgement” by holding the referendum.

“It was a very bad call,” the former Business Secretary said.

The night began with confusion after Mr Farage all but conceded defeat when 10pm poll forecast Remain would win by 52% to 48%.

He admitted: “It looks like Remain will edge it.”

But less than two hours later he rowed back and said the result could still go either way.

He said even Leave won less than half of the vote “whatever happens tonight, whoever wins the battle, one thing I am certain of is we will win this war.”

Leave supporters quickly changed their tune as the first results went their way and Remain failed to pile up the votes in their strongholds.

Brexit -backing Tory MP Steve Baker was “fairly confident we are going to win”.

He said: “It’s obviously still looking neck and neck but far better results than I think anyone would have thought a few months ago.

“Bearing in mind this has been a David and Goliath fight against all the odds.

“I think it’s an astonishing thing that we are standing here looking at the results and Leave are tens of thousands of votes ahead at this stage, so I’m very pleased,” he said.

After millions voted in one of the biggest ever anticipated turnouts David Cameron faced the biggest challenge of his career as he prepared his speech to the nation this morning.

Whatever the outcome, he said his mission was to begin healing the wounds inflicted by the referendum that he had called – and to persuade the UK to accept the result and unite behind it.

A senior Downing Street source said the PM’s tone would be conciliatory.

“Unity is now important,” the source said.

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn echoed his sentiment. Speaking before the polls closed, he said: “Political leaders must accept the decision of the people.

"We also have to acknowledge the huge dissatisfaction expressed by millions.

“We now need to bring people together after the divisions exposed in the past few months – and push ahead with demands for reform, in Britain and Europe, set out by Labour.”

Lib Dem leader Tim Farron will also use a speech at lunchtime today to “frame the peace”.

Mr Cameron is drawing up plans for a “unity reshuffle” to heal the wounds of the referendum.

Allies of the Prime Minister said he had no intention of stepping down if the country voted Leave and would stay to steady the ship.

Supportive ministers were preparing to tour the broadcasting studios in a “save Dave” charm offensive.

Leave also won in other Labour heartlands including Sunderland, Birmingham, Sheffield, Swansea, Darlington, Rotherham, Coventry and Stockton.

Remain won in big cities including Liverpool, Leeds, Glasgow and Edinburgh but turnout was not high enough to give Leave momentum.

