David Beckham leads sports stars backing Remain as Brexit campaigners score own goals

2016-06-21

 David Beckham led a host of sporting stars backing Remain today - while wife Victoria became embroiled in a furious row with Brexiteers. 

 Outlining his support for staying in the EU ahead of Thursday's EU ​referendum , the former England captain said 'Europe is a team and it needs to play together to succeed'. 

He was joined by England rugby union hero Lawrence Dallaglio, champion jump jockey AP McCoy and marathon star Paula Radcliffe in a huge eve-of-poll boost for the In campaign.

Former England footballer Rio Ferdinand, Wales goalkeeping legend Neville Southall and darts master Bobby George also penned a letter pressing the Remain case.

And leading Leave camapigner Michael Gove was left red-faced after claiming ex-England midfielder John Barnes backed Out.

 But the former Liverpool star was so miffed by the claim that he called Sky News to insist he was backing Remain. 

“The EU has its problems, and I’m not happy with the EU on certain things,” he admitted.

“But you cannot base your vote on immigration, because it has to be a collective responsibility to help us solve the problem - and Britain should be the last ones to leave because of that problem.”

 Angry John Barnes phones the news from South Africa to tell everyone he doesn't back Brexit 

 The Leave.EU campaign group seized on Beckham’s announcement by highlighting how ex-pop star Victoria slammed Brussels bureaucrats when she was in the Spice Girls. 

In a 1996 interview with The Spectator magazine, she was asked about the prospect of Britain joining the euro.

Posh Spice said: “The Euro bureaucrats are destroying every bit of national identity and individuality.

“Let me give you an example - those new passports are revolting, an insult to our kingdom, our independence. We must keep our national individuality.”

Leave.EU posted part of the quote with the comment “should’ve listened to the missus, David”.

 But the singer-turned-fashion-designer today accused the group of “misusing” comments. 

Victoria, 42, who declared she was “so proud of David”, accused the group of trying to “put a spin on quotes made 20 years ago about keeping or losing the pound”.

The mum of four wrote on Instagram: “I have to say strongly my comments were not about this referendum and should not be misused in this way!

“I believe in my country, I believe in a future for my children where we are stronger together and I support the Remain campaign.”

 Read more: Who's backing Remain and who supports Brexit? How the famous are voting 

Leave.EU said her original comments were “absolutely clear”.

The group added: “We quoted her in her own words on the EU - seems that she can also Bend the facts like Beckham.”

 Pledging his backing to Remain , David, 41, said: “I played my best years at my boyhood club, Manchester United. 

“I grew up with a core group of young British players that included Ryan Giggs, Paul Scholes, Nicky Butt and the Neville brothers.

“Added to that was an experienced group of older British players such as Gary Pallister, Steve Bruce and Paul Ince.

“Now that team might have gone on to win trophies but we were a better and more successful team because of a Danish goalkeeper, Peter Schmeichel, the leadership of an Irishman, Roy Keane, and the skill of a Frenchman in Eric Cantona.

“I was also privileged to play and live in Madrid, Milan and Paris with team-mates from all around Europe and the world.

“Those great European cities and their passionate fans welcomed me and my family and gave us the opportunity to enjoy their unique and inspiring cultures and people.

“We live in a vibrant and connected world where together as a people we are strong. For our children and their children, we should be facing the problems of the world together and not alone.

“For these reasons I am voting to Remain.”

 However, Crystal Palace FC chairman Steve Parish slammed Premier League chief Richard Scudamore's claims that all 20 clubs backed Remain and said celebrity endorsements from stars like Beckham were 'the politics of the playground'. 

