A Brexit vote is a vote to reclaim your democracy and decisions that affect your life

2016-06-21

At last the day has nearly arrived. Finally, the British people have their chance to take back control.

It is the first time the people of this great country have been allowed to decide in more than 40 years and we won’t have another opportunity in our lifetimes.

The choice is clear. You can claim back your democracy and the decisions that affect your lives.

Or you can give the green light to the limo-riding classes in Brussels who no one can touch, as they grab more and more power.

From the Remain camp, it was Jeremy Corbyn who most honestly answered one of the big questions.

At the weekend when he was asked what he thought of putting a limit on EU migration, the Labour leader replied: “I don’t think you can have one while you have the free movement of labour.”

He was right. We can vote leave and start to manage EU migration sensibly and fairly.

Read more: Leaving the EU would endanger our economy, our security and Britain’s influence in the world

Or we can vote Remain and accept free movement from Europe without any limits for ever.

Mr Corbyn was being more frank than the other Remain leaders who seem to think we can stay in the EU and beg Brussels to curb freedom of movement.

Let's face it, we saw how little the Prime Minister was able to extract from the EU in his renegotiation even when armed with the possibility of Britain voting to Leave.

Why would Brussels suddenly offer more if we vote to stay?

I am sure Mirror readers will make their choice based on the facts.

Do not be put off by the intimidation tactics of the Remainers who resort to the suggestion that anyone who wants to Leave is opposed to the open, tolerant spirit of today’s Britain.

I have been on the campaign trail for more than two months and what I have heard time and again from people across the country from St Austell to Newcastle has been the same.

Whatever their job, whatever their background, they want to take back control - of their money, of their borders, of their democracy.

In recent years, we have gone through a huge change as the EU has expanded from nine to 15, and now to 28 countries, with 1.25 million people added to Britain’s population since 2004 because of the EU’s rigid free movement rules.

Few people saw it coming and no-one voted for it.

Another five countries, including Turkey, are being lined up for membership.

It is those on the lowest incomes whose wages are harmed by uncontrolled migration, as the Bank of England has said.

Those on the lowest incomes feel the pressure on schools and hospitals and the difficulty of getting a foot on to the housing ladder.

If we Leave, we can bring in an Australian-style points system that welcomes those whose skills we need - not least the medical staff who we have so much to thank for in the NHS.

A properly regulated system will be fairer to people in Britain and it will be fairer to migrants themselves, including those from outside Europe who the current system discriminates against.

I'm pro-immigration but it has to be controlled and there has to be consent from the people of this country. So long as we stay in the EU that's simply not possible.

There are huge opportunities for our economy and public services if we Leave, not least getting back the £350m a week -- and rising -- that Brussels charges us to be a member.

We could spend an extra £100m a week on the NHS and have billions left over for other priorities like getting rid of VAT on energy bills for pensioners.

Brussels controls this tax and we cannot cut it even if most voters want to.

If we leave, we will be able to do the international trade deals that help to create jobs and prosperity.

 EU Referendum countdown 

And we will do them through the democratic system, not have them stitched up behind closed doors between corporate lobbyists and the Brussels bureaucrats.

We have seen what happens when democracy is elbowed aside.

The Greek people’s decisions were ignored by Brussels, which forced its economic medicine down their throats, destroying the hopes of a generation and leaving more than half of young people there jobless.

Democracy is the best way ever invented to improve the lives of the people in this great country.

Let’s Vote leave and take it back.

