Why Labour heartlands like Yorkshire gave the EU the Barnsley chop

2016-06-24

 They gave the famous Barnsley Chop to the EU . 

This is a proud, working class town – Labour to the tips of its pit boots.

 But they voted by more than two to one to reject Jeremy Corbyn ’s half-hearted Remain plea. A seismic result, off the political Richter scale. 

Barnsley’s 68% Leave vote was one of the highest in the country – exceeding even the figure for UKIP’s stronghold of Rotherham.

They listened to Arthur Scargill rather than the town’s four Labour MPs, including widely-tipped leadership contender Dan Jarvis, and the party’s borough councillors, who outnumber the rest by 10 to one. In the town’s renowned market, voters were unrepentant. Volubly so.

Mostly, they cited immigration, but the perceived weakness of Corbyn was also a factor.

Brian Higgs, 67, a former Transport and General Workers’ Union shop steward with a long history of Labour activity, set the tone. I’ve always been a Labour voter, but I voted Leave, basically over immigration,” he said.

“But they have been threatening us that we can’t look after our own workforce and the EU need to be doing that – and they don’t. I’ve been a union man for 25 years, a shop steward, and we fought for our people without the EU. We don’t need them. It was all just scaremongering.

“Labour MPs have not been listening to what their constituents have been saying. They say we should stay in, and when you get 68% voting out, they definitely haven’t been listening.

 “Obviously there will be a downturn, but let’s face it, working men have been on a downturn for the last  10 or 12 years. We’ve been too long in recession. We might still have another two years, and then see what the hell we can do on our own. 

 “I don’t think Jeremy Corbyn was 100% behind it anyway. 7.5 out of 10? He wasn’t saying that before. But even if he was saying 10 out of 10 I don’t think people might have listened to him. He should reflect on his own position. 

“I think there should be a leadership change. We need someone who reflects the working man.”

Would he vote Labour next time? “I don’t know. I would have to study the situation. If Dan Jarvis were leader I would definitely back him.”

You don’t get much more Labour than these two men sitting on a market bench. Nathaniel Clarke, 74, a retired lagger from Ferrybridge power station who did five years down Glasshoughton Colliery, and William Warriner, 76, a veteran of Prince of Wales Colliery, both voted Leave, though William hesitated before making his X. Nathaniel agrees that immigration was the number one issue. “Too many people coming into the country.

“Don’t get me wrong. I’ve just been in Pinderfields Hospital with pneumonia and everyone was a different nationality, and the staff were marvellous. But why don’t they train our own people?”

He’s sceptical about promises of money for the NHS. “What will they do with all this money they save?

 “Will they put it back into the country or not? It’s still a Conservative Government.” 

So, does he regret voting Leave? “No, no, no!”

I also found ex-Royal Marine Paul Bates, 45, who has voted Labour in the past. He’s a butcher actually selling Barnsley chops – a chunky lamb speciality of the town.

He is unapologetic. “I voted Leave. I now think we have got a time of austerity. Nobody knows what’s going to happen in the long term, but it can only be a good thing for England.

“When they started talking about a European army, that swayed it for me. My wife, Suzanne, a nurse, also voted Leave.

 “And to be honest, immigration was an issue. I like the Australian points system. If we need people like a surgeon – or a butcher – yes, but not open borders. I don’t put much faith in Jeremy Corbyn to be honest. 

“But this result is a shot across the bows for all parties. It’s obviously what Britain wants, and now they have to sort it out.”

Pensioner Mary Powell, 79, shopping at the meat stall, bucked the trend. “I voted Remain,” she told me. Why? “Because my paper, the Daily Mirror, thinks it’s best, and my husband thinks it’s best.”

But her daughter, Ruth Allen, a 42-year-old school teacher, voted Leave. “I don’t think it was a party issue. It was a more personal issue.” As Barnsley went, so went most of Yorkshire. Bradford, Craven, Calderdale, Doncaster, Hull, the East Riding, Kirklees, Rotherham, Scarborough, Sheffield and Wakefield all voted Leave.

Only Leeds – by the narrowest of margins – York and Harrogate held out against the tide of anti-EU feeling.

It was a classic split between metropolitan, high-earning centres versus the post-industrial, working class and rural areas, repeated elsewhere across England.

I bought one of the famous chops. £3.50, it cost me. I shall have it for my tea tomorrow. Barnsley had the political establishment for breakfast this morning.

