Glastonbury Festival organisers slam Brexit with touching poem as punters react to EU referendum result

2016-06-24

Glastonbury Festival organisers have taken a shot at the UK's decision to leave the European Union with a passionate and touching poem.

The piece - acting as a statement for the vent - was placed on display as the festival continues at Worthy Farm, and has been shared online as punters are called to sing their "protest songs".

The poem includes the lines: "It can't be true, can it, really? It is. It's a day none of us have felt less British.

"As those around us crack open breakfast wine and shout for revolt. I think we're pretty safe in the knowledge that it's nobody's here fault. So let's trudge on through the mud, And sing out loud our protest songs. As the country is divided - in this field we belong"

Read more: Watch thousands sing 'We Shall Overcome' together in moving tribute to murdered Jo Cox

It comes as punters have reacted to the news, with one festival-goer admitting the mood feels "really flat" as they learned of the outcome of the vote.

David Munnery, 43, said: "There's a sombre mood already, you see people wandering around, it felt really flat, it felt really down.

Read more: Lily Allen pulls out of Glastonbury due to knee injury

"I'm sure people will continue to make the most of it but I feel had we stayed in, the majority of people here would have felt much more enlivened and happy and it would have been a far more positive experience.

"Given the event this is, bringing people together from across the world, to have this happen whilst we're all here feels like a real blow."

Richard Parkin, 23, from Leeds said he would try to put the result aside.

He said: "It might sound a bit callous but I'm going to try and maybe ignore it as much as possible, put it to the back of my mind and get back to thinking about it after the thing's done. There's nothing else you can do really, you're completely powerless outside of it."

Bridget Johnson, 53, who has been to Glastonbury 10 times before, said this year's festival would always be remembered as "the EU Glastonbury".

She said: "We heard about it at sixish this morning, one of my sons rang us to let us know and we've heard it on the speakers. Generally everyone's buzzing and they're speaking about it."

She said she was "shocked, pretty anxious, worried about what's going to happen next".

Her daughter Keira, 15, said she had been upset that she did not have a chance to have her say.

She said: "I would have liked the opportunity to vote, but that's not going to happen."

While the general mood of the festival is pro-Europe, with organisers Emily and Michael Eavis having called on their guests to vote to Remain, some festival-goers will be celebrating.

Stephanie Lamb-Howard, 30, from Port Talbot in Wales, said: "I only turned up this morning, I voted last night at 5 to 10. I needed my vote to get in, but I voted Out, it had to be Out, and I'm so glad we went, so double celebrations today."

