Michael Gove's fantasy island: Mirror Politics morning briefing

2016-06-16

Prepare yourself and your families for six days of relentless referendum campaigning.

The only certainty we have at the moment is the result is uncertain.

The remain camp have been spooked by the depth of support for Leave but their internal polling says they could still clinch victory on June 23.

Their hopes rest on the fact that the undecided voters will, when faced with the option, will not take the gamble of Brexit.

They also point out that the polls do not include Northern Ireland where the majority of voters are in favour of Remain.

But this may be clutching at straws and there is no denying the anxiety, especially among Labour MPs, at the dogged levels of support for Leave.

Partly this is because the referendum has become the opportunity for people to express their anger at rising inequality, immigration and a London-centric political and business elite.

We are witnessing the release of the safety valve on frustrations which voters failed to vent at last year’s general election.

Leave has seized on this anger and laced it with a gut appeal to people’s patriotism.

They are selling the idea that leaving the EU will bring an immediate end to many of the problems faced by people struggling on low wages and unable to get a decent home or a good school for their children.

 This was at the heart of Gove's message on BBC Question Time last night where he painted an idyllic picture of post-Brexit Britain that was about as realistic as Disneyland . 

Remain has countered by citing evidence from the WTO, the IFS and a host of other independent experts.

We have yet another acronym wading in today when the International Monetary Fund (IMF) announces its verdict on the consequences of Brexit.

And tonight we could hear more doomsday warnings from George Osborne and Bank of England Governor Mark Carney.

Boris is back on his battlebus for a tour of East Anglia, while Gordon Brown and John McDonnell will be campaigning together in Manchester (with a break for the football obviously).

Jeremy Corbyn is giving a speech in Sheffield on the case for Remain and David Cameron is on a surprise visit to Gibraltar.

Amid all this excitement it is easy to forget the Tooting by-election takes place today.

Labour would be mortified if it were to lose Sadiq Khan's former seat.

 * If you would like the newsletter sent to your inbox sign up here : http://www.mirror.co.uk/newsletters/politics-newsletter/ 

