Now EU Referendum campaign is over Labour must win back working class voters

2016-06-23

 Throughout the Scottish referendum I watched Labour canvassers showered in abuse by their natural supporters. 

Those party workers, or “Red Tories” as they were being called by many working-class voters for not backing independence, didn’t realise it, but they were inadvertently sowing the seeds of their own destruction.

 At the following year’s General Election Labour was virtually wiped off the Scottish political map. 

 It’s why, during this referendum, the Labour leadership refused to share a platform with top Tories and concentrated on issues like workers’ rights. All understandable. 

But the party now needs to understand something much bigger.

As in Scotland, there are hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of Labour voters who no longer feel the party speaks to them, or for them.

And as in Scotland, they will want to punish Labour for ignoring them, and having been liberated from a tribal duty to vote for the only anti-Tory party that matters, they will realise they don’t have to return.

 As Andy Burnham warned, when he was stunned by the number of his Leigh constituents who were ignoring Labour advice and voting Leave: “We have to be more Hull and less Hampstead.” 

Forget internal Blairite/Corbynite squabbling, if Labour doesn’t realise very quickly that their main mission is to re-connect with disillusioned supporters in their traditional heartlands they may never seriously challenge for power again.

 They have to go to those areas where their people voted Leave en masse and address their genuine fears on issues like immigration . 

When people feel at the back of the queue it’s not good enough to dismiss them all as racist or patronise them by saying “that’s the way it is I’m afraid.” They need to be told the party is on their side. Or they’ll find another one.

They could start by demanding EU funding for areas with the highest immigrant numbers and ensure over-stretched Labour councils aren’t the only ones who take in asylum-seekers.

The Tories will re-group before the next election to protect their own interests because they know if they don’t, they have much to lose.

Many Labour voters have nothing to lose, so will enjoy wreaking vengeance on a party they feel has deserted them.

In too many towns and cities that Labour once held with ease, too many people no longer view the party as Us but Them.

They have to start changing that perception today.

Because the People’s Party is facing its most fundamental challenge since its formation more than a century ago when it asked itself how it could win power for the working-class.

The burning question now, after two bruising referendums is “how do we win back vast swathes of the working-class.”

