Jeremy Corbyn battling to save his job as MPs submit motion of no confidence

2016-06-24

Jeremy Corbyn is battling to save his job after furious MPs submitted a motion of no confidence in his leadership.

 The Labour leader was accused by angry backbenchers of running a half-hearted campaign to keep Britain in Europe which failed to get the backing of a third of Labour supporters. 

Veteran MP Margaret Hodge put forward the motion, which is to be voted on by backbenchers early next week.

 She said: “It is a motion of no confidence in Jeremy Corbyn , which I hope he’ll think about seriously, reflect on and do the decent thing, as David Cameron has done. 

“I think the European referendum was a test of leadership and Jeremy failed that test.

“He came out too slowly, he was very half-hearted about his attempts to campaign and Labour voters simply didn’t get the message.”

But Mr Corbyn refused to back down and said: “I’m carrying on.”

He was backed by the heads of 12 major trade unions, who warned Labour MPs against trying to depose their leader.

 Meanwhile, the Mirror can reveal that relations between the leader’s office and the official Labour In for Britain campaign became so bad that its chief Alan Johnson threatened to resign less than a month before polling day . 

A senior source accused members of Mr Corbyn’s team of sabotaging the campaign by repeatedly “watering down” his pro-EU message.

This was roundly dismissed by Mr Corbyn’s office, who insisted his Euroscepticism was more in tune with Labour voters.

 But the motion of no confidence was seconded by Stockport MP Ann Coffey, who warned Labour members who elected Mr Corbyn: “They can either win the next election or have Jeremy Corbyn as leader, but they can’t have both.” 

She added of his referendum campaign: “His heart wasn’t in it. People know if your heart isn’t in something. The public are not stupid.”

Although the motion is largely symbolic, a defeat would almost certainly be followed by a full-blown leadership challenge.

Mrs Hodge has long been tipped as a possible stalking-horse candidate. More likely replacements for Mr Corbyn would be Shadow Chancellor John McDonnell, who many MPs suspect of being “on manoeuvres”, and Shadow Business Secretary Angela Eagle.

Some backbenchers still hope for a leadership bid from former Army Major Dan Jarvis.

 But Mr Corbyn’s team are confident he retains the support of most Labour members. A source in his office said: “At this stage we don’t even know if this motion is legitimate. It’s a matter for the Parliamentary Labour Party .” 

While in a Channel 4 interview, the Labour leader, elected last September, made it clear he would not resign.

He added: “I’m making the case for unity, I’m making the case of what Labour can offer to Britain, of decent housing for people, of good secure jobs for people, of trade with Europe and, of course, with other parts of the world.

“Because if we don’t get the trade issue right, we’ve got a real problem in this country.”

And in a joint statement, the heads of 12 major unions including Unite, Unison, Aslef and the Fire Brigades Union warned: “The last thing Labour needs is a manufactured leadership row of its own in the midst of this crisis and we call upon all Labour MPs not to engage in any such indulgence.”

Some of the biggest defeats for Remain came in Labour heartland areas such as the North East, the West Midlands and Yorkshire.

 Internal Labour party sources insisted “obstruction” from Mr Corbyn was a key reason for losing the vote. One said: “Every time Jeremy made an intervention it would be a watered-down version of what he was supposed to say.” 

A bitter row exploded more than three weeks ago over a letter backing Remain, signed by more than 200 Labour MPs, which the leader’s office tried to re-word at the 11th hour.

A source said: “Alan [Johnson] was furious, he threatened to resign.” But a close ally of the leader insisted: “Supportive of Remain but critical of the EU is where our supporters are.

 “Frankly, they [Mr Corbyn’s critics] were always going to blame him if we got a Brexit vote.” 

Labour is now bracing itself for a possible general election within 12 months. A senior source close to Mr Corbyn said: “We have to prepare for that. A month or two ago it became clear that, whatever the result of this referendum, everything had to be done with the aim of being ready to go to the polls.”

While the Labour leader said of the possibility of a snap general election: “I think the issue will come up after the election of the new Tory leader. They may well decide to call an election.”

But many of Mr Corbyn’s MPs fear a wipe-out if they go into an election with him in charge.

 South Yorkshire MP Angela Smith told the Mirror: “This is not the time to go sobbing in the corner. The Labour Party needs leadership in the forthcoming period that is up to the job of making a contribution. 

 “ Jeremy Corbyn has to consider his position. I think he has shown insufficient leadership in terms of how the campaign has been run.” 

 Former Labour Prime Minister Tony Blair also criticised Mr Corbyn’s campaign. He told Sky News: “Let me be frank here, I think the leadership of the Labour party was pretty lukewarm in its support for Remain. 

“I don’t think we really organised and mobilised our supporters to understand this was not a protest vote against the Government, or the establishment. It was a decision, and it’s a decision that will have enormous consequences.”

 But asked if the leader should resign, he said: “There are much, much bigger questions for the Labour Party right now. We’ve really got to consider what our purpose is, where we’re going and what we’re trying to do here.” 

