What will happen to immigration into the UK after vote to leave the EU?

2016-06-24

From Nigel Farage's 'Nazi propaganda' poster to Boris Johnson's promises to 'take back control of our borders' - immigration formed a cornerstone of the Leave campaign.

An Ipsos Mori poll on the eve of yesterday's Brexit vote also revealed only the economy proved a bigger issue for voters than immigration.

But how will leaving the EU actually effect immigration?

Last year, net migration to the UK rose to 333,000 - the second-highest figure ever.

The figure for migration from EU countries was 184,000 - around 0.29 per cent of our population or a town the size of Peterborough.

There is no doubt the vote to leave the European Union will bring about some profound changes to immigration and border controls.

The Leave campaign has stressed the Brexit vote will bring no changes for EU nationals living and working in this country.

Such a move would be likely to trigger diplomatic issues with countries like Spain where a large number of British expats currently live as well as potential legal challenges.

But there are likely to be significant changes to border security.

Currently the border between Britain and France is bound by Le Touquet agreement, which allows UK border controls to be based on the French side of the channel.

The arrangement has been blamed for the establishment of migrant camps especially around the Port of Calais.

Although the agreement is not directly related to the EU - the Brexit vote is likely to see French politicians less motivated to continue to arrangement, which is seen by some to benefit the UK more than France.

French economy minister, Emmanuel Macron, threatened the Calais’ camp would “move to Dover” if Britain left the EU.

He said: "The day this relationship unravels, migrants will no longer be in Calais and the financial passport would work less well."

Secretary of State for Northern Ireland and Leave campaigner Theresa Villiers denied during the campaign that Brexit would see the return of border controls between the Irish nations.

But in reality that depends on the terms of the UK's exit - there is no escaping it will become a land border between an EU and non-EU country.

During the referendum, David Cameron said border controls between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland would be inevitable.

He said: "If we were to Leave, and, as the Leave campaigners want, make a big issue about our borders, then you’ve got a land border with Britain outside the European Union and the Republic of Ireland inside the EU.

"Therefore you can only either have new border controls between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland, or, which I would regret hugely, you would have to have some sort of checks on people as they left Belfast or other parts of Northern Ireland to come to the rest of UK."

The vote also sparks the possibility Ireland and Scotland could hold their own independence referendums in the coming years.

Options for a new border controls measures discussed by the Leave campaign included an 'Australian-style' points system.

Australia uses a dual immigration selection scheme including employer sponsorship programmes and the skilled migration visa, which is based on a points system.

Brexiters argued the free-movement of EU citizens unfairly discriminated against those wanting to come to Britain from outside the EU and led to us turning away highly-qualified migrants.

Michael Gove said new rules would mean applicants have to speak English and have skills needed by the UK.

The problem will be introducing a system that isn't bound in the sort of red tape the Leave campaign complains about in Brussels and a system which has an army of officials understanding the needs of every area of UK industry.

Critics have warned if this isn't achieved new border controls could harm the economy.

A study by the Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development recently found migrant workers have boosted the UK's public purse over the past decade and EU free movement has helped redress imbalances in our labour market.

Four years ago, David Cameron pledged to bring down net migration to 100,000-a-year.

Even if no EU nationals came to the UK in 2015, this target would have been missed.

Tighter controls in the wake of Brexit should theoretically bring down EU migration.

75,440

But the main snag in the 'Australian-style' points system is that Australia introduced it to INCREASE its population by "growth through immigration".

Migration Watch said: “The Australian context could hardly be more different. Many Australians believe that they have a strategic need to grow and have the space to do so."

The majority of EU migrants come to Britain to work and almost half (41 per cent) already have a job lined up.

The reality is, we don't yet know the reduction in migration which will be brought about by Brexit , but its effect on the economy could be profound.

Ian Preston from the University College London's Department of Economics said: "It's quite simple. When the economy is doing well, people will come in higher numbers for work, and when it slows, you will see those numbers drop.

"We don't know what the government will do with the immigration system if it leaves the EU, but we certainly can't say it would reduce migration without having significant, profound economic costs."

