3 things Nigel Farage has said that he tried to wriggle out of after Jo Cox's murder

2016-06-19

EU referendum campaigning resumed today after a two-and-a-half day silence in honour of Jo Cox.

And with the shock of the Labour MP's murder still fresh in politicians' minds, the EU referendum took on a more subdued tone.

This meant a softer approach for Nigel Farage, who nonetheless claimed "I don't think we would've had the kind of row we've had" over his 'Nazi-like' campaign poster if Mrs Cox hadn't died.

During the sessions he was asked if he regretted the tone he's used as Westminster reconsiders its anger-filled approach to politics.

Three times he corrected or tweaked words of his own that he thought had been taken out of context.

Read more:  

So what were the words in dispute - and did his hasty interventions tell the full story?

Compare what Mr Farage said today to the original quotes (with evidence and dates) and decide for yourself.

Does Farage contradict himself over 'violence on the streets?'

BBC Radio 5 Live asked if Mr Farage regretted hinting at "the possibility, the faint possibility, of violence" over immigration fears.

Ukip's leader butted in: "I'm sorry, that's ridiculous. I have said that I don't think it's very likely at all we'll ever see violence on the streets of this country as we've seen in Greece and elsewhere."

Host John Pienaar replied: "Well Nigel, you told me in an interview."

Mr Farage said: "Extremely unlikely is what I told you over lunch that day, and you should remember that very well too. Everything in life is possible, but I view it as extremely unlikely".

"I think it's legitimate to say that if people feel they have lost control completely, and we have lost control of our borders completely as members of the EU, and if people feel that voting doesn't change anything then violence is the next step.

"I find it difficult to contemplate it happening here, but nothing's impossible."

Mr Farage shook his head vigorously today as ITV's Robert Peston asked: "Do you stand by your remarks that we could see Cologne-style incidents in this country of men abusing women?"

He then deflected the question, saying: "What happened in Cologne happened and things like that have happened since in Germany.

"The real point I'm making is that part of the European Union we've lost control of who can come into our country. We would be safer taking back control."

For the record Mr Farage also denied he'd raised "the fear of attacks on women" before there was this weekend's greater sensitivity, during a BuzzFeed Q&A on June 10.

He said: "I haven't actually. I could've done, but I didn't. It's very easy if you wish to read a newspaper headline as opposed to what someone's said."

"We've been through 100 years of female emancipation and liberation and I put it to you that the mistakes of Mrs Merkel are now threatening all of that.

"What we saw outside that train station in Cologne on New Year's Eve was, I think, truly and genuinely shocking.

"I'm not saying that we are not immune from such problems in this country, we've seen some terrible scandals that have happened here.

"But to me, if you allow the unlimited access of huge numbers of young males into the European continent, who come from countries where women are at best, second class citizens, don't be surprised if scenes that we saw in Cologne don't happen more often.

"But for goodness' sake, do we want those young men in five years to have EU passports and all to be able to come to our country and to reverse a hundred years of female liberation and to change our entire way of life?"

Sky News host Dermot Murnaghan challenged Mr Farage today over saying Brexit campaigners had lost momentum after Jo Cox's murder.

Emphasising the word 'whole', Ukip's leader replied quickly: "Out of the whole campaign is what I said.

"There was a big momentum developing right across the country. A tragic death, a pause. Very difficult to know or to see in the next 3 or 4 days where either of the campaigns go in terms of the public once again connecting with it."

Asked if Leave will win: "I think we have momentum - er, we did have momentum until this terrible tragedy."

He added: "It's had an impact on the whole campaign for everybody."

But the self-styled anti-establishment campaigner then repeated: "When you're taking on the establishment you need to have momentum."

