D-Day veteran begs Britain to vote Remain in EU Referendum to ensure peace in Europe

2016-06-16

An D-Day veteran has made an impassioned plea for Britain to stay in the EU - to keep the peace in Europe.

Eric Jay, 91, used a Facebook page to urge people not to return to “old Europe” with its “dangerous” ideas of nationalism.

The veteran of the Normandy landings said he was “angry” with the “lies peddled” by the Brexit campaign and the failure by the right-wing press to report “the wealth of sound economic, social and political advice that Britain should remain in the EU.”

But he also said he was frustrated by the lack of passion by the Remain camp and the Labour leadership in putting the case for staying in the EU.

The post, which has been shared thousands of times, continued: “Angry because of the appeal Brexit makes to the racist, anti-foreigner ‘little England’ mentality which is still part of the national psyche.

Read more: Gordon Brown makes EU referendum Remain plea as he says debate has descended into Tory row

“Angry because, at the age of 91, as someone who 72 years ago this month landed in Normandy with the liberation forces, I remember vividly the old Europe of warring factions and am convinced that the EU, for all its need of reform, remains a power for good in the world.

"For Britain to leave it would open the door to European disintegration and a return to the dangerous nationalisms of the past.”

Mr Jay, from Bristol, said he had written the post because he was “frightened” the Remain campaign had been so muted.

“We have heard a lot about the economic consequences of Brexit but not about the pandering to racial prejudice.

EU Referendum countdown

“It is absolute lunacy for Britain to want to leave. It would be disastrous for us for all the reasons the economists have said.

“I was so incensed about this. I’ve never put out a post before but I’m glad I did it and I hope it encourages other people.”

During the war, Mr Jay worked in London as private secretary to a senior officer in the Ordnance Corps.

After serving as a lance corporal for three and a half years, he worked as a Methodist minister for 28 years.

