Michael Gove compares pro-EU experts to Nazi scientists

2016-06-22

 Michael Gove last night compared pro-Remain experts to Nazi scientists , in an extraordinary live radio outburst. 

The leading Leave campaigner said "we must be careful about historical comparisons" - but immediately compared leading economists and business leaders to Nazi propagandists.

In his comparison, he seemed to suggest the experts backing the Remain campaign could be "in the pay of the government."

He told LBC Radio: "I think the key thing here is to interrogate the assumptions that are made and to ask if these arguments are good.

"We have to be careful about historical comparisons, but Albert Einstein during the 1930s was denounced by the German authorities for being wrong and his theories were denounced, and one of the reasons of course he was denounced was because he was Jewish.

"They got 100 German scientists in the pay of the government to say that he was wrong and Einstein said: 'Look, if I was wrong, one would have been enough.''

"The truth is that if you look at the quality of the analysis, if you look at the facts on the ground, you can come to an appropriate conclusion.

"And the appropriate conclusion, I think, all of us can come to is that with growth rates so low in Europe, with so many unemployed and with the nature of the single currency so damaging, freeing ourselves from that project can only strengthen our economy."

Former Labour leader Ed Miliband condemned Mr Gove's comments.

 He tweeted: "Michael Gove should be ashamed: comparing experts critical of Brexit to Nazi scientists is vile and repulsive." 

And Jeremy Corbyn said: "That's offensive and absurd. Michael Gove as a former Education Secretary should know better than that. It's disgraceful."

During a debate on Sky News earlier in the campaign, Mr Gove claimed the British people had "had enough of experts".

 He was challenged by Sky's Faisal Islam to name a single economic authority or international figure who backed Brexit, and failed to do so. 

Mr Islam then jokes: "I'll give you a half (a point) for Donald Trump," referring to recent support from the presidential hopeful and sometime steak salesman.

Trying to wriggle out of the question, Gov went on to say: "My view is when you hear foreign leaders - don't pay attention to what they say, pay attention to what they do."

But Mr Islam hit back asking him to name one economic authority that also backed his policies - but again he couldn't.

Mr Islam then asked: "Why should people trust you, Boris Johnson and Nigel Farage?" slamming them as carrying out "Oxbridge Trump" politics.

Gove simply replied: "I'm asking people to trust themselves."

