Best EU Referendum campaign quotes as the country goes to the polls

2016-06-23

 Campaigners have spent months trying to convince people either to vote Remain or to opt for Brexit . 

There have been wild claims, arguments and it has become one of the most divisive political campaigns of recent memory.

 But amongst all the infighting there have been some truly great, and downright hilarious, EU Referendum quotes. 

“I’m chairman of, sorry, of Stay in Britain, Better in Britain campaign. Right, start again!

 "I’m Stuart Rose and I’m the chairman of the Better in Britain campaign, Better Stay in Britain campaign.” 

 Britain Stronger in Europe chairman Lord Stuart Rose forgets the name of his campaign four times, January 25 

“The thin gruel has been further watered down.”

  Tory eurosceptic MP Jacob Rees-Mogg on David Cameron’s draft EU deal, February 6  

“The British people must now decide whether to stay in this reformed European Union or to leave.

"This will be a once-in-a-generation moment to shape the destiny of our country.”

  PM on finalising his renegotiation deal in Brussels, February 20  

  

“I will be advocating Vote Leave – or whatever the team is called, I understand there are a lot of them – because I want a better deal for the people of this country, to save them money and to take control.”

  Boris Johnson reveals himself as a Brexiteer, February 21  

  

“The UK is going to be in the back of the queue.”

  US president Barack Obama warns striking a new trade pact with the UK will not be an American priority, April 22  

  

“When I heard that I did think of Pinocchio and the nose growing rather longer.”

  Iain Duncan Smith rubbishes George Osborne’s claim house prices will dive by 18% if we Leave the EU, May 21  

  

“This beautiful specimen … this contented cow … this beautiful, beautiful, Ribble Valley-reared – what is she? - cow!”

 Boris Johnson auctions a cow in the Ribble Valley in one of the more bizarre stunts of the campaign, June 2 

  

“People in this country have had enough of experts.”

  Michael Gove dismisses the latest Brexit warnings, June 3  

  

“Get that lie off your bus!”

  Labour MP Angela Eagle urges Vote Leave to remove the £350million figure from its battle bus ​, June 9  

  

“Boris, he’s the life and soul of the party. But he’s not the man you want to drive you home at the end of the evening.”

 Pro-EU Cabinet Minister Amber Rudd targets Boris Johnson during an ITV debate, June 9 

  

“Seven, or seven and a half.”

  Jeremy Corbyn grades out of 10 his enthusiasm for the EU during an appearance on Channel 4’s The Last Leg, June 10  

  

“In no sense do I have some divine hotline to the right answer. But for my part, I shall vote to remain.”

  Archbishop of Canterbury Justin Welby comes out for In, June 12  

  

“So what?”

  Nigel Farage shrugs off claims Sterling will plummet after Brexit , June 12  

  

“Six sausage rolls, four steak bakes and two corned beef slices, please.”

  Hungry Ed Balls places a Gregg’s order during a Labour battle bus pit stop, June 14  

  

*“You’re no fishermen’s friend, Nigel!”

  Rocker Sir Bob Geldof hurls abuse at Nigel Farage as the UKIP leader’s flotilla sails through London during the Battle of the Thames, June 15  

  

  

“My hubby @MrBrendanCox & children taking part in the battle of the #Thames - because we’re #StrongerIn #Remain.”

  Labour MP Jo Cox tweets a picture of her family the day before she was murdered, June 15  

  

“I’m In – you know what sort of s*** you’re in when you’re In, but you don’t know what sort of s*** you’re going to be in when you’re Out.”

 Suffolk fish filleter Tony Blowers on why he’s backing Remain, June 16 

“When I saw that poster, I shuddered. I thought it was the wrong thing to do.”

 Michael Gove on UKIP’s “Breaking Point” migration poster, June 19 

  

“When you challenge the establishment in this country, they come after you, they call you all sorts of things.”

 Nigel Farage claims he has been a victim of hatred in UK politics, June 19 

  

“So are you really the 21st Century Neville Chamberlain, waving a piece of paper in the air, saying to the public ‘This is what I have, I have this promise’ where a dictatorship in Europe can overrule it?”

 A voter mocks the PM during the BBC’s Question Time special, June 19 

  

“I don’t think Britain at the end is a quitter. I think we stay and fight. That is what we should do.

"That is what made our country great and that’s how it will be great in the future.”

  David Cameron hits back on Question Time, June 19  

  

