Orgies, rowdy Russians and a scolding for the PM: Your most commented and shared stories this week

2016-06-17

 Prime Minister David Cameron got a telling-off during an EU debate this week after an angry audience member gave him a piece of her mind. 

 Meanwhile, Euro 2016 continues to hit headlines for events off the pitch as well as on it. 

 Elsewhere, some swingers have attracted the ire of a rural community and Labour's Jeremy Corbyn makes his case for Britain remaining in the European Union. 

Want to know more? Check out our rundown of what you've been saying and sharing over the past seven days.

 Russian thugs in balaclavas attacked England fans in the stadium at the final whistle of the sides' opening Euro 2016 game. It came moments after Russia stunned England by scoring an injury-time equaliser to force a 1-1 draw. 

 Women and children were apparently trampled by Russian supporters as they pushed across into the England section of the Stade Velodrome in Marseille. 

 Nottinghill was appalled: "My family have been saving and planning to go to Russia for the World Cup 2018. After seeing this we have decided to change our plans and spend our money elsewhere. 

"No-one pays good money to go and get attacked by thugs when we all know that nothing will be done to them. It's really disappointing."

 The Prime Minister was fielding questions from an audience put together by Facebook and Buzzfeed when he was confronted by an angry woman called Yasmin. 

 She told him: “I’m voting Remain but nothing to do with you guys. “I hate the Tories . I have just got to say you have f***** every f****** thing up in this country." 

 The outspoken Yasmin had a fan in Davethered : "This lass said what millions are thinking. On the flipside, just HOW have the Tories improved the lives of ordinary working folk and their families? They have ignored and trodden all over anything we value." 

 Sir Bob Geldof led a small fleet of Remain-backing vessels to ambush Nigel Farage, leading his own flotilla of Leave-backing fishing trawlers up the Thames to Westminster. 

 At one point, Sir Bob was confronted by a pro-Brexit fisherman Paul Marchant , who said he was dying of cancer, over EU fishing quotas. He told the pop legend that he just wanted his children to be able to follow in his footsteps. 

 KimSingleton was pleased the musician invited Mr Marchant on board, saying: "I hope Geldof changes his mind now he has heard from the fishermen." 

 The sleepy rural community of the Forest of Dean is bracing itself for the arrival of 700 swingers at Europe's biggest orgy and wife-swapping festival. 

The three-day event upset some locals last year with reports of gatecrashers trying to get into the all-ticket 'secret site' through their gardens.

Residents also complained about loud music and banners proclaiming 'three is the magic number'.

 Takingflight won't be buying a ticket: "If they want to be swingers then that is up to them but they shouldn't disrupt a community in doing so, it's wrong. Plus it could put the hens off laying." 

 Disgusted Owen Jones stormed out of Sky News after the presenter tried to distance the Orlando shooting from LGBT hate crime. 

 Mark Longhurst told the left-wing writer people should "delineate" between Islamist terror and homophobia after the attack which killed 50 at gay Florida nightclub Pulse . 

That prompted a furious response from Mr Jones, who is gay and said the attack was both things at once.

And he threw up his arms in denial after Mr Longhurst told him "you cannot say this is a worse attack than what happened in Paris".

 Mervyb agreed with Jones' actions: "Owen Jones was totally right to walk out." 

He continues: "If all journalists and political commentators stood up for what they truly believe, there would be more honesty in the press."

 Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn discussed his thoughts on the future of Britain in the European Union 

 Former Voice contestant Christina Grimmie was killed after being s hot while signing autographs . 

The 22-year-old , who took part in the US version of TV talent show, was signing autographs for fans in Orlando, Florida when she was shot.

 Dimitri Payet celebrated with his sons after his stunning match-winning heroics on the opening night of Euro 2016. 

 The France star ignited the tournament for the hosts slamming in a late, late winner to send the Stade de France into raptures . 

 A hospital worker was found naked in a chair after allegedly masturbating himself to death . 

The unnamed man's body was discovered in an isolated area of a New York City hospital.

 It is believed the man was fatally overcome by a heart attack while pleasuring himself to a porn video on a laptop, according to local reports. 

 A group of British teens on their first holiday abroad were forced to flee for their lives after gunmen opened fire at a Bulgarian beach bar . 

Ross Warbeck, Joel Ewart, Nathan Smith, Craig Pool and Jack Adams were in the 4you pub in Sunny Beach on Wednesday night when five masked gangsters entered.

 Wielding pistols, the gunmen peppered the inside of the premises with bullets, prompting the terrified lads to sprint away from the scene. 

