Nigel Farage takes back EU Referendum prediction Remain will win and says 'anything could happen'

2016-06-23

 A floudering Nigel Farage flip-flopped over polls as the results showed Remain would win the bitterly fought referendum campaign to keep the UK in Europe. 

The UKIP leader at first appeared to concede defeat after a final YouGov poll published at 10pm gave 52% to Remain and 48% Leave.

He admitted: “It looks like Remain will edge it.”

But less than two hours later he rowed back and said the result could still go either way.

He said even Leave won less than half of the vote “whatever happens tonight, whoever wins the battle, one thing I am certain of is we will win this war".

 Brexit Cabinet Minister Theresa Villiers also suggested Remain had scraped it. 

“My instinct tells my that Remain has won,” she said.

But some Leave supporters said it was too early to concede defeat.

The first result of night came from Gibraltar which voted by 19,322 to 823 for Remain - 92% to stay.

The historic poll has split the country and prompted as leaders of all the main parties prepared to call for unity as Britain woke up to a divided nation.

Labour’s deputy leader said the country was badly split and that the Prime Minister must now work to “heal the wounds”.

 He said: “It does seem to me there is a challenge for David Cameron , or whoever leads the Conservative Party. 

“Because let’s face it - we end this referendum with the country more divided than it was at the start of the referendum.

 “I think it’s incumbent on David Cameron to try and bridge that divide, try and heal some of the wounds that the referendum campaign has brought about in the country,” he said. 

A bitter Mr Farage said he thought the UK had voted to stay in the European Union based on “what I know from some of my friends in the financial markets who have done some big polling”.

He blamed the decision by the Government to extend voter registration for an additional 48 hours.

“The whole Government campaign has been about registering young people and that’s made a big, big difference,” he said.

Even before the first result had been declared the infighting and recriminations on the Leave side had started.

 UKIP’s sole MP Douglas Carswell slammed his infamous ‘Breaking Point’ poster. 

“It was a fundamentally the wrong thing to do” and “morally the wrong thing to do”, Mr Carswell said.

 But Tory Leave campaigner Iain Duncan Smith said it was far too early to make a call. 

He said turn-out was sky-high in the working class areas where he was hopeful many people would be voting Leave.

“We’re in uncharted territory here. I never quite follow what Nigel Farage says.

“But I have picked up on the fact turn out is very very high in council estates where normally it is 30-40% for a general election,” he said.

But the final YouGov poll suggested Labour supporters had overwhelmingly for Remain by 69% to 31%.

By contrast the majority of Tories had backed Leave by 57% to 43% for In.

 After millions voted in one of the biggest ever anticipated turnouts David Cameron faced the biggest challenge of his career as he prepared his speech to the nation this morning. 

Whatever the outcome, he said his mission was to begin healing the wounds inflicted by the referendum that he had called – and to persuade the UK to accept the result and unite behind it.

A senior Downing Street source said the PM’s tone would be conciliatory.

“Unity is now important,” the source said.

 Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn echoed his sentiment. Speaking before the polls closed, he said: “Political leaders must accept the decision of the people. 

"We also have to acknowledge the huge dissatisfaction expressed by millions.

“We now need to bring people together after the divisions exposed in the past few months – and push ahead with demands for reform, in Britain and Europe, set out by Labour.”

Remain campaigners had been “quietly optimistic” the historic vote was going their way.

A flurry of late opinion polls all point to Britain wanting to stay in the EU.

One survey, by Populus for the Financial Times, had EuRemain at 55% and Leave 45%.

An Ipsos Mori poll put the race closer with 52% for staying in and 48% wanting out.

Markets surged across the globe at the prospect of a Remain vote. More than £220billion was added to the value of the world’s 3,000 top firms, lifting the FTSE 100 up 33 points to 6,294.

And the pound soared against the dollar to over $1.50, the highest since December.

Labour frontbencher Lisa Nandy believed Labour’s late surge into the campaign​ could have proved decisive.

Ipsos Mori poll for the Evening Standard p

The Shadow Energy Secretary said the PM “owes” Labour voters if they have saved his referendum fight.

 She said: “I think he owes them. I think David Cameron has a duty now to listen to a lot of working people in this country who feel that, partly as a consequence of the EU, but more often as a consequence of the decisions that we’ve made politically here in the UK, that they have been left behind - and that the concerns they have about the future and the anxieties that they have about the future is not being addressed.” 

Mr Cameron was tight-lipped as he cast his vote with his wife Samantha at Methodist Hall in Westminster.

But Mr Corbyn was more positive when he went to the polling station in his Islington constituency, North London.

Asked if he was feeling confident, he replied: “Extremely, it’s a very good day.”

He added: “You could either check the wind or check the bookies. The bookies usually get it right”. They had odds of 7/1 of a Remain win.

Leave leader Michael Gove said he was feeling “quite excited” as he accompanied his wife, Sarah Vine, to a polling station in North Kensington.

But urban areas such as London and Edinburgh were heading for Remain, while rural areas and old industrial areas shifted towards Leave.

Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson, one of the stars of the Remain campaign, looked confident as she cast her vote in Edinburgh.

 And former Labour PM Tony Blair tweeted a picture of himself saying ‘I’ve voted Remain”. 

Mr Cameron is drawing up plans for a “unity reshuffle” to heal the wounds of the referendum.

Allies of the Prime Minister said he had no intention of stepping down if the country voted Leave and would stay to steady the ship.

Treasury minister David Gauke was the first out the blocks to call for the Tory Party to come together.

 “Whatever the result, now’s the time for the Conservative Party to unite and deliver on our manifesto,” he said. 

Supportive ministers were preparing to tour the broadcasting studios in a “save Dave” charm offensive.

 He was tipped to try to bring the Tories together by promoting Brexit campaigners to senior posts, meaning a possible Cabinet position for Boris Johnson. 

