'Only Europe can protect us from this Tory Government' - Workers united against Brexit

2016-06-16

Amid the air war firing scattergun statistics, a bizarre nautical battle on the Thames and the blue-on-blue fire of Tory snipers, it can be easy to miss the quiet working people’s voices making a patient case to stay in the European Union.

But when I voted by post today, I was thinking of two people I met this week – Angie Roberts, an ambulance worker from the North Wales coast, and Stuart Davis, a maintenance technician of Stoke-on-Trent.

On Thursday afternoon they were divided by football , but united in their call for Britain to remain part of the EU .

Angie, 45, works for the NHS in Rhyl. Her voice cracks when she talks about what Brexit would do to her beloved health service.

“I get choked up,” she says. “I come from the land of Aneurin Bevan. It makes me want to cry.

"They have no idea what would happen to the NHS if we leave Europe and the economy crashes. Vulnerable people will suffer.”

Angie does a tough job transporting patients, many to hospices at the end of their lives, or to and from chemotherapy treatment.

A Unison member, this week she was chosen to introduce Jeremy Corbyn at a special TUC event where union leaders lined up with Labour’s shadow cabinet to call on people to defend our NHS by voting Remain.

“It’s not just the NHS,” she says. “It’s so many things.” Rhyl, where she lives, one of the poorest parts of Wales, has been transformed by EU money, including the Foryd Harbour scheme.

EU Referendum countdown

Her son, Tommy, 15, wants to be a research scientist, a job she knows relies heavily on EU collaboration and funding.

“The other day, I picked up a 94-year-old man who had been in the D-Day landings,” she says.

“I shook his hand and thanked him. The EU was created to stop us having to fight those wars.”

Sixty miles away, Stuart, also 45 and a maintenance technician on Bentley Motors’ 70-acre site in Crewe, is getting stick from his colleagues about agreeing with the Prime Minister.

“I can’t wait for next Friday when I can get back to hating Cameron,” he says.

A father of two, and senior Unite rep, he has worked for Bentley for 30 years.

“I do have concerns about immigration like lots of people,” he says, “and I know Europe’s not perfect.

"But as a working man, I think we’re best off in the EU. We need Europe’s protection against this Government.

“A Tory Government after Brexit led by Iain Duncan Smith, Michael Gove and, God forbid, Boris Johnson would be ripping working people’s rights apart, of that I have no doubt. It actually frightens me.”

Bentley was bought by German company Volkswagen in 1998.

“They employ 4,500 people in our area, and without them I’ve no doubt we’d be a retail park by now,” Stuart says.

“These are decent jobs. And there are six times that amount in the supply chain.

“Since we were bought by VW we’ve gone from building 1,000 cars a year to building 10,000 a year, and from building one model to six models.

"We bid against other factories to make the new models, and we win even though we’re not the cheapest. It’s because of our skills, but it’s also because we sell a lot of cars here.”

He worries that, after Brexit , his plant would stop winning the bids because it will be easier and more cost-effective for VW to build inside the EU.

Read more: Michael Gove's claims about dad's business are 'latest in line of fishy statements'

Recent European rulings have meant millions in extra wages for workers like him who do a lot of overtime.

“And we work together with German trade unions. To walk away from that table would be crazy. All of that is before you even look at the single market. It would be absolutely crazy.”

Brexit has tried to position itself as the voice of the people, and Remain as the voice of elites. But in truth there are elites on both sides, and ordinary people too.

Last week, a think tank, the Centre for European Reform, showed that Britain’s Eurosceptic regions have the most to lose from a Leave vote. They called it “Brexiting yourself in the foot”.

After speaking to Stuart on Wednesday, I watched the wealthy businessman Arron Banks floating down the Thames on a Brexit flotilla.

Banks, bankrolling the Leave.eu campaign told an MPs' committee he thinks any cost to ordinary people “is a price worth paying” for exit, and that it’s not “a bad thing” if prices go up.

“This isn’t about pounds and pence”, says the multi-millionaire. He also believes the NHS should be privatised.

Meanwhile, both Stuart and Angie know who will suffer most next Friday morning if the country votes out of the EU, and David Cameron resigns.

Watching the Tory right seize back control of its party, it will be hard not to wonder whether that was all this supposed fight for Britain’s democracy was really about.

