It is better to risk success if we vote for Brexit than guarantee failure with Remain

2016-06-20

My gut instinct is to leave .

I want my kids to grow up in a country with a democratically elected government, laws made by Parliament and judges that decide cases under British laws.

It is a formula that has preserved our liberty for centuries. It is the economic arguments that muddy the water.

The very real economic risks of leaving have come to dominate the debate.

These worries cast a longer shadow as we head into an economic downturn.

The problem is that neither side has presented a coherent economic vision of life after the referendum .

The Remain Campaign talks as if the only risks come from leaving.

But an economy yoked to a failing Euro, hampered by waves of regulation and dogged by rising political extremism on the left and right, is unlikely to succeed.

Read more: Answer to legitimate concerns about immigration can be found but not by leaving EU

And while the EU is great for trade inside Europe, its record of securing trade deals outside its borders is poor. 

For the Leave Campaign, the unanswered questions are more important.

It is not enough to say that we will work out the economics after the vote.

Open Europe is a neutral but reformist think tank. It reports that Britain’s economy could be more successful outside the EU, but only if it adopts the right policies.

The key will be to strike as many free trade agreements as possible, not just with the EU but with the rest of the world.

Immigration is an emotive issue - all too often tinged with an unattractive meanness of spirit.

Of course we need to prevent people coming to the UK to claim benefits and live off the state. We can’t afford it.

But the vast majority of immigrants work hard and enrich our economy (and culture).

EU Referendum countdown

Without their contribution our nation would be poorer in every sense.

Of course if we leave, the UK can still opt for a constructive and welcoming immigration policy.

But will the Leave Campaign simply pull up the drawbridge? Will they exclude those who work so hard and contribute so much, simply because they come from overseas?

It is dangerous to leave this question open to speculation, and the the case for voting out would be much stronger with a clear economic plan.

With these uncertainties, are the risks of voting to leave worth it? I think the answer is probably still yes.

If we sacrifice our nation’s liberty for prosperity we are likely to lose both freedom and wealth.

Better to risk success outside the EU rather than guarantee failure within.

