An analysis of Brexit from a currency perspective - will leaving the EU affect the British pound?

2016-06-22

The impending referendum in the United Kingdom is taking centre stage in global currency markets this year, write foreign exchange specialists Rational FX.

Today, the people of the UK will vote to decide whether or not to remain as part of the European Union (EU).

Not since 1975 has the general public had a say on the UK’s membership to the EU, but now the time has come.

At the start of the year Cameron was tasked to seek a new agreement with other EU leaders to change the terms of Britain’s membership.

According to Cameron, the new deal agreed gives the UK special status within the European Union. The main points of the deal were changes to migrant welfare payments, securing the pound and the UK running its own affairs within Europe.

Campaigners wanting to remain say this will help to sort out some of what the British public say they do not like about the EU, such as high levels of immigration and being controlled by European courts.

Critics have said the deal does not go far enough and falls well short of what David Cameron had outlined he would change when he announced his plan for a referendum.

The arguments for and against Brexit are vast, but two prevailing arguments for and against are how a Brexit may affect the economy and immigration issues. Campaigners to stay in the EUR argue that leaving will have a dramatic negative impact on the economy.

Recently Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne has stated that leaving the EU could plunge the UK into an instant recession.

Recent analysis by the Treasury shows the recession could last for a year and the level of UK GDP would be 3.6% lower in two years’ time if the UK does decide to leave.

Campaigners to leave the EU continually stress the issue of immigration. Being part of the EU means that workers from other EU countries have the right to come and work in the UK.

Critics say migrants are taking jobs and places in schools for British citizens. On top of this, citizens from Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, Albania and Turkey will soon all have the right to work in the UK, worsening the problem further.

It remains to be seen whether the UK decides to stay in the EU - with the outcome all soon to be revealed - stay tuned on our Brexit page for all the updates live today.

For more on foreign exchange and overseas money transfer go to Rational FX.

