Boris Johnson and Michael Gove not bothered about David Beckham voting remain - because they have Sol Campbell

2016-06-21

Boris Johnson and Michael Gove have laughed off David Beckham's profession of support for the remain campaign - because they've got Sol Campbell and John Barnes on their side.

Bumbling blonde Brexiteer Boris, confronted with the crushing news during an LBC Radio phone-in programme, seemed disappointed, but reeled off some footballers who are still on the 'out' team.

"David Beckham, I know," he sighed. "Sol Campbell, however is for Leave."

Host Nick Ferrari asked: "So? He's not quite the level of David Beckham, is he?"

Boris countered: "John Barnes...?"

"Not quite the level of David Beckham", Ferrari repeated, joking: "Which way is Geoff Hurst going to vote?"

Michael Gove told Sky News: "David? Well, I don’t know him well, and I think he’s made his mind up.

“What I would say is that there are lots of people from sport like Sol Campbell and John Barnes.

"And from the world of entertainment like Liz Hurley and Michael Caine, but critically, from business and manufacturing and people who create jobs like Anthony Bamford and James Dyson."

 Former England Captain and Tory activist Sol Campbell wrote in the Mail On Sunday in April, saying his former club, Arsenal, would benefit from Brexit . 

He said European Free Movement rules prevent clubs nurturing home-grown talent.

He said: "The Premier League is in danger of becoming a free-for-all because, along with the star players, we are seeing teams load up with too many mediocre overseas footballers, especially from Europe, crowding out young English and British talent."

 Mr Campbell put his hat in the ring to be the Tory candidate for Mayor of London, but was rejected in favour of Zac Goldsmith . 

Former England winger and World In Motion rapper John Barnes also supports Brexit.

He told the Evening Standard he doesn't "see a downside of leaving" the EU, adding that it would probably mean "there’ll be more English managers and more of a chance for English players."

 EU Referendum countdown 

