Who voted for Brexit? How the EU referendum divided generations and social classes

2016-06-24

 The referendum result divided generations, pitted nations of the UK against each other and split social classes. 

Scotland and London voted In, but were pulled out by Wales and the rest of England.

Class splits emerged, with the rich and well educated beaten Out of the 28-nation bloc by poorer, working class voters.

 And pensioners overwhelmingly backed Brexit , while the younger generation tried in vain to save the country’s EU membership. 

Just two out of five people aged 65 and over backed staying in.

In contrast, 75% of voters aged 18 to 24 plumped for Remain.

Remain campaigners had urged OAPs to talk to their grandchildren before crossing their ballot papers.

They hoped the youths could persuade their elders to vote In for the sake of the next generation.

But the plan flopped, with critics branding it patronising and even offensive.

YouGov statistics show euroscepticism grew with age, with 56% of those aged 25 to 49 backing Remain, plunging to 44% of voters aged between 50 and 64.

For pensioners aged 65 and over, it dropped even further to 39%.

“Angry and disappointed” Lib Dem leader Tim Farron said: “Young people voted to Remain by a considerable margin, but were out voted.

“They were voting for their future, yet it has been taken from them.”

National Union of Students president Megan Dunn said: “This is clearly not the result that many young people wanted or voted for.

“But most important now is to ensure that students and young people are involved in the decisions that have to be made that will shape their future.

“We have urgent questions about how the vote to Leave will affect students, particularly EU students in the UK and UK students studying in the EU, and call on the Government to offer clear assurances to them about their situation.”

 Former Tory peer Lord Ashcroft , who polled 12,369 people after they voted on Thursday, found strong support for Leaving among the older generation. 

“Nearly three quarters (73%) of 18 to 24 year-olds voted to remain, falling to under two thirds (62%) among 35 to 44s,” he revealed on lordashcroftpolls.com.

“A majority of those aged over 45 voted to leave, rising to 60% of those aged 65 or over. Most people with children aged 10 or under voted to Remain; most of those with children aged 11 or older voted to Leave.”

Age was not the only factor to split the country. A regional breakdown of results highlights the extent to which the United Kingdom has been divided.

London and Scotland voted overwhelmingly for Remain, with the capital splitting 60% to 40% for In.

Scots were even more sure, dividing 62% to 38% in support of staying in the EU, while Northern Ireland was 56% to 44% in favour.

But Labour’s heartlands united with Tory shires to scuttle the UK’s 43-year EU membership.

Traditional working class voters in South Wales, the Midlands and across northern towns revolted against Labour’s pleas for Remain.

 Overall, the Welsh voted Out by 52.5% to 47.5%. The north west was 54% to 46% for Leave, while the north east backed Brexit by 58% to 42%. 

Across the Tory constituencies of middle England and the south west, Leavers decided they wanted to torpedo Britain’s place in the Brussels club.

The East Midlands supported Out by 58.5% to 41.5%, while the West Midlands was Out by 59% to 41%.

The breakdown showed the struggle the next Prime Minister will have to try and bring the divided UK together again.

 Lord Ashcroft ’s research also found no difference between how men and women voted – despite eve-of-poll claims women were more likely to vote In. 

The rich and middle-classes were more pro-EU.

 The AB group backed Remain by 57% to 43%, while the poorer C2DE category was almost two-thirds in favour of quitting, voting Out by 64% to 36%, according to Lord Ashcroft . 

Ethnic minorities and Muslims were Remainers, while whites and Christians were Outers.

 Lord Ashcroft said: “A majority of those working full-time or part-time voted to Remain in the EU; most of those not working voted to Leave. More than half of those retired on a private pension voted to leave, as did two thirds of those retired on a state pension. 

“Among private renters and people with mortgages, a small majority (55% and 54%) voted to Remain; those who owned their homes outright voted to Leave by 55% to 45%.

“Around two thirds of council and housing association tenants voted to Leave. A majority (57%) of those with a university degree voted to Remain, as 64% of those with a higher degree and more than four in five (81%) of those still in full time education.

“Among those whose formal education ended at secondary school or earlier, a large majority voted to leave. White voters voted to Leave the EU by 53% to 47%.

“Two thirds (67%) of those describing themselves as Asian voted to Remain, as did three quarters (73%) of black voters.

“Nearly six in ten (58%) of those describing themselves as Christian voted to Leave; seven in 10 Muslims voted to Remain.”

