Brexit could see energy bills soar, one of Britain's biggest unions has warned

2016-06-19

Energy bills for millions of consumers could rise if the UK votes to leave the EU, one of Britain’s biggest unions warn.

Unison, the giant public sector union, says a Brexit move could make power supplies more vulnerable.

The union I attacks the “ fanciful” claims made by leave campaigners, who have promised cuts in energy bills, simply do not stack up.

Ahead of its energy conference later today, UNISON says exiting the EU will not help tackle any of the key energy challenges currently facing the UK.

Brexit could seriously harm the UK’s efforts to meet energy demands, satisfy its climate change obligations and cushion consumers from energy price hikes.

Unison says uncertain future outside the EU and dwindling domestic resources such as North Sea gas have the potential to drive prices up considerably.

The vote leave campaign has said household bills could be cut because the UK would no longer have to abide by EU rules that stop member states from cutting VAT below 5%.

 

But any cut to domestic energy bills would be more than swallowed up by the higher cost of supply, which would result from Brexit say union leaders.

Plans to provide new capacity to supply energy in the UK rely heavily on European energy firms.

And EU withdrawal could also put this investment at risk.

Among the projects with major European commitments are the Hinkley Point C nuclear plant in Somerset, which is being financed to the tune of several billion pounds by French company EDF.

*Dave Prentis, Unison leader, *said: “Outrageous claims as to how consumers would be better off were the UK to leave Europe are yet another attempt by the vote leave campaign to mislead the public.

“Making promises they can’t expect to keep about energy bills is the only thing cheap about the Brexiteers.

“Rather than saving hard-pressed families money, energy costs for domestic use and for businesses are likely to go through the roof if we leave the EU.

"This would force many families into even greater fuel poverty and prompt UK firms to lay off workers.”

