Victoria Beckham lashes out at Leave.EU campaigners for 'misusing' her 1996 anti-Euro interview

2016-06-21

 Victoria Beckham has lashed out at Brexit campaign group Leave.EU for "misusing" anti-Euro statements she made in a 1996 interview in their promotional materials. 

The group, funded by millionaire Arron Banks and fronted by Nigel Farage, quoted an interview she gave with the Spice Girls to the Spectator in 1996.

 They used the quotes in a Twitter graphic after her husband, forme England captain David Beckham, announced his support for Brexit. 

The tweet read: "Should have listened to the missus, David."

 In a post on her Instagram account, the Out Of Your Mind singer wrote: "In response to the @leave.eu campaign who have today tried to put a spin on quotes made 20 years ago about keeping or losing the pound, I have to say strongly my comments were not about this referendum and should not be misused in this way! 

 "I believe in my country, I believe in a future for my children where we are stronger together and I support the #remain campaign." 

In the interview, she said: "The whole European Federal plan is ridiculous. We are patriotic. The single currency is an outrage. We want the Queen's head — or the King's head if we have a king — on our own coins."

"It's been a terrible trick on the British people," she added, reportedly outraged by "the impertinence of the bureaucrats in Brussels. The Euro-bureaucrats are destroying every bit of national identity and individuality.

 And she was upset about passports having "European Union" on them long before Nigel Farage started waving his about. 

"Let me give you an example — those new passports are revolting, an insult to our kingdom, our independence. We must keep our national individuality."

Leave.EU have been bullish in their response to the Beckham rebuttal.

Founder and funder Arron Banks tweeted: "Bend it like Beckham. We quoted her comments. Suck it up, Vicky."

In the 1996 Spectator interview, Geri Halliwell declared the Spice Girls were, as a group, "suspicious of Europe."

Geri in particular was wary, presciently calling for a referendum on the Maastricht Treaty.

 Meanwhile, lead Brexiteers Boris Johnson and Michael Gove have said they're not bothered about David Beckham backing remain, because they have Sol Campbell and John Barnes on their side. 

 EU Referendum countdown 

