Boris Johnson BOOED by angry crowd outside his home after Leave campaign triumph in Brexit vote

2016-06-24

Boris Johnson was booed as an angry crowd gathered outside his home following this morning's Brexit vote.

The Brexit backer was protected by police as he was bundled into a blacked-out people carrier.

Reporters had been expecting some triumphant words from the Leave campaign's most high-profile figure but Boris dashed from his front door and into the car before driving off.

A large crowd audibly booed before shouting "scum" and "traitor" at the former Mayor of London and banging on the windows of his car as he sped away.

Just yards down the road his vehicle was then blocked in by dozens of cyclists who continued to taunt the 52-year-old.

The nation is waking up to the shock Brexit vote after the Leave campaign secured as 52 per cent vote against the predictions of pollsters and political experts.

The UK was split as Scotland and Northern Ireland voted to remain but a large turnout across England secured a Brexit vote.

Many working-class Labour heartlands and traditional shire Tory voters went against party leaders and voted to leave the European Union.

The vote has triggered the shock resignation of Prime Minister David Cameron who said in a statement outside Downing Street this morning that the UK needed "fresh leadership".

He said: "The British people have voted to leave the European Union and their will must be respected.

"The country requires fresh leadership to take it in this direction," added the PM.

Read more: 

"I will do everything I can as Prime Minister to steady the ship over the coming weeks and months, but I don't think it would be right for me to try to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination.

"This is not a decision I've taken lightly but I do believe it's in the national interest to have a period of stability and then the new leadership required."

After eight years as mayor of London, Boris has frequently been tipped as the next leader of the Tory party and is the bookies' favourite to succeed Mr Cameron.

He led one of the official campaigns for Brexit and his political ambitions will have been buoyed by the public's decision to vote leave.

Earlier this week he told The Telegraph: “Frankly, if this is the end of my political career … I’ve done eight years as mayor of London, I enjoyed it hugely, it was a massive privilege. Fine by me."

In March a poll revealed that Boris was the clear favourite to take over from Cameron among both the public and Tory supporters.

Cameron said he would remain in his post for a few more months to "steady the ship" until a successor can take over and lead Britain's negotiations with the E.U. on the specifics of its exit from the 28-nation trading bloc.

He said he expected a new prime minister to be in place by October.

A Scottish piper stuck two fingers up to Boris with an early morning wake up call on the day he led campaign which took Britain out of the EU.

The bag pipe player serenaded his north London townhouse with Scotland the Brave as he slept shortly after 6.30am following the momentous night for Britain.

The wannabe Prime Minster had reportedly been up until 5am before going to sleep before he planned to attend a Brexit victory event today.

The whole of Scotland voted to Remain as voters in England and Wales were persuaded by Boris's Brexit warnings about immigration and an expending European superstate

The piper - sent by the Mirror's sister paper in Scotland the Daily Record - also belted out a cheeky rendition of the German national anthem as well as Flower of Scotland.

The decision to leave the EU after 43 years sparked fears for the breakup of Britain and triggered a sterling collapse.

Nicola Sturgeon said Scotland's future "lies in the EU" and in Northern Ireland Sinn Fein called for a vote on a united Ireland.

