Brexit to trigger 'Black Friday' drop in pound warns billionaire George Soros

2016-06-24

 A vote to leave the EU will trigger a plunge in the pound greater than Black Wednesday, billionaire currency trader George Soros has warned - but without the benefits seen after the crisis that made him a fortune. 

 The veteran financier said he was certain sterling would fall steeply and quickly should voters back Brexit , leading to a "Black Friday" scenario more immediate and dramatic than when Britain crashed out of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) in the 1990s. 

However, unlike the departure then, there would be none of the benefits to the economy seen by a devalued pound and most voters will be left "considerably poorer", he predicted.

 Read more : 

Mr Soros said it was "wishful thinking" by many that a vote to Leave would have little effect on their personal finances, with only a lucky few City speculators in line to get rich on such a move.

The Hungarian's hedge fund reportedly made one billion dollars off a 10 billion dollar (£6.9 billion) bet against the pound at the time of Britain leaving the ERM.

Speaking to The Guardian, he said a devaluation in the pound would be bigger and more disruptive than the 15% drop seen in September 1992.

However, with Britain's finances in a more fragile state than then and interest rates running at record lows, there would be little room for the Bank of England to manoeuvre.

Furthermore, the resulting uncertainty would impact exporters hoping to exploit a cheaper pound, Mr Soros warned.

 Read more : 

He told the newspaper: "Too many believe that a vote to Leave will have no effect on their personal financial positions. This is wishful thinking.

"If Britain leaves the EU it will have at least one very clear and immediate effect that will touch every household: the value of the pound would decline precipitously.

"A vote to leave the EU would also have an immediate and dramatic impact on financial markets, investment, prices and jobs.

"A vote to Leave could see the week end with a Black Friday and serious consequences for ordinary people."

