Ukip's Steven Woolfe reads out his own pro-Brexit poetry, then wells up as he thanks Nigel Farage

2016-06-22

Ukip MEP Steven Woolfe wrote a poem about Brexit, which he read out in front of dozens in front of dozens of supporters before Nigel Farage's final speech of the campaign.

The poem, entitled "England's beaten heart", complains of the death of the dreams of those who "signed at magna carta's tree" in favour of a "commission that knows not the word 'free'"

The unsubtle verse goes on to warn the "blind eyes turned by those who knew" would help kill England's heart.

Later, Mr Woolfe welled up with tears as he gave an emotional speech thanking leader Nigel Farage for his service to the cause of Brexit.

As Nigel fiddled with his watch, Mr Woolfe began by thanking the party's supporters.

He said: "Without you and what you've been doing the past few years, and what you will be doing in the next 24 hours to make sure that as Nigel says, tomorrow becomes our independence day, we wouldn't be there."

Mr Woolfe's voice audibly cracked as he added: "More than anything else, for someone who came into politics from a good job in the city to fight for this country, I want to say thank you to Nigel, for allowing me to be part of this momentous occasion."

Mr Woolfe's emotional moment came after Nigel gave his final speech of the campaign.

He introduced Mr Farage by dramatically reading out some pro-EU poetry.

He refused to apologise for his widely condemned "Breaking Point" poster.

Speaking in central London, Mr Farage said: "I apologise for the timing and I apologise for the fact that it was able to be used by those who wish us harm.

"But I can't apologise for the truth. And after all, this was a photograph your newspaper carried, this was a photograph that all newspapers carried, it is an example of what is wrong inside the European Union."

He said the decision by German Chancellor Angela Merkel to welcome so many migrants into Europe has "created divisions between countries".

He made his comments following his final speech on the campaign trail urging people to vote Leave in Thursday's referendum.

Speaking to press from all over the world and Vote Leave supporters in Westminster, Mr Farage branded the EU "a big business cartel".

He said: "We find ourselves, for the benefit of tariff-free trade, having to accept unlimited free movement of people.

"We find ourselves prohibited from making our own deals with the rest of the world."

Mr Farage accused Brussels of usurping control and sovereignty from the UK, and imposing EU law which "is supreme".

His voice rising with passion and pulling out his passport from his jacket and waving it in front of the microphone - a signature move by the Ukip leader - he declared: "We don't even have a British passport anymore" - raising a clap from his supporters in the audience.

He said: "Let's stop pretending what this European project is - they have an anthem, they are building an army, they have already got their own police force, and of course they have got a flag.

"At the end of the day tomorrow when people vote they have to make a decision - which flag is their's?

"I want us to live under British passports and under the British flag."

