Customers refused euros at NatWest, RBS and Thomas Cook due to 'unprecedented demand' after Brexit

2016-06-24

 Major high street banks and travel operators have stopped selling euros due to a surge in demand following Britain's decision to leave the European Union . 

 NatWest and the Royal Bank of Scotland as well as Thomas Cook have temporarily suspended currency exchanges, while the Post Office travel money website has also crashed. 

 Customers reported arriving at bank branches today only to be told that foreign cash wasn't being given out while those logging onto Bureau de Change websites found they were down. 

 The companies say the problems have been down to an "unprecedented demand" for euros in the wake of the EU referendum results, revealed in the early hours of this morning. 

 It followed a plunge in the stock markets when £124 billion was wiped off the FTSE 100's biggest UK companies while the pound plunged to a 31-year low against the US dollar. 

 People vented their frustration on Twitter , with one user saying "NatWest has stopped accepting foreign currency because the £ has dropped so low #eurefresults." 

 Read more: 

Joanne Timms tweeted directly to NatWest: "Bloody hell. Britain vote out of the EU by a few hours & you can't even handle that! Systems down apparently!"

NatWest, which is part of the RBS group, has been redirecting online customers to order money from its provider Travelex.

An RBS spokesperson said: “We’ve seen a high level of demand for travel money and frequent movement of rates.

"To better help our customers with their travel money needs we’ve decided to temporarily re-direct all orders to www.travelex.co.uk for up to the minute travel money currency rates."

 Read more: 

Thomas Cook announced it temporarily restricted orders picked up in store to £1,000 per customer.

A spokeswoman said: "We have temporarily suspended our travel money website following unprecedented customer demand for foreign currency overnight and this morning. We apologise to all customers affected.

"Our immediate priority is to ensure that we have enough currency in store to fulfil outstanding orders. We hope to be back up and running as soon as possible."

They later clarified: "Thomas Cook is only restricting on-line orders to be picked up in store that were made yesterday to £1000 (as per our on-line terms and conditions).

"Customers walking to our stores who have not pre-ordered can still purchase over this amount at today’s rate, subject to availability."

The Post Office website has also crashed after becoming strained under the high level of traffic.

A Post Office spokeswoman said: “We have received a huge increase of visitors to the travel money page on our website and we believe this is mainly due to people checking rates.

'We can reassure customers that they can still buy currency online but due to the number of people visiting the page it may take longer than normal, and for this we apologise.

"Customers can also still buy euros on demand at over 10,000 branches and US dollars in over 4,000 branches.”

