Tragic death of Jo Cox has drawn the poison out of the EU referendum

2016-06-18

 I can confidently predict the outcome of the EU referendum right now. 

 Whether you are voting Remain, Leave or intend to hide under your duvet, we are all losers. 

This time next week, there won’t be a person who doesn’t feel bruised and somehow diminished by the past few months.

It was trumpeted as the people’s chance to have a voice, democracy in action. And yet, what have our elected political leaders done with our precious democracy?

On all sides, they have trampled it, ground it into the dirt and left it in the gutter.

Both campaigns opted to create heat and not light, resentment not reason.

It is perhaps too early to jump to conclusions but with the tragic death of Jo Cox, it now feels that we have been horribly, horribly burned.

There is a bitter irony in the fact that the instant the news broke about the assault on the clearly much admired and respected MP, a level of sanity was restored to the referendum debate ... or maybe it was just that they all shut up for while.

 Read more: 

I wonder, did the most vociferous amongst them take a moment to reflect on their own behaviour and how poisonous they have allowed this referendum to become?

Did they sit and ponder how we could have got to the closing stages of a lengthy democratic process and found ourselves in such a bitter and reductive dogfight? Did they play with the possibility that this toxic atmosphere might have given a spark to Thomas Mair’s deranged decision to gun down, in cold blood, a vibrant and intelligent mother of two?

Jo Cox’s husband and children’s loss is the most profound and must be recognised as such but we have all been let down.

This is a huge decision we have to make this week.

It will shape our lives, our country and its place in the world for generations to come.

Of course, there will be divided opinions but, having grandly given us our right to have our say, surely our politicians had a duty to facilitate and enhance the democratic process, not to do their level best to trash it.

 Read more: 

The quality of debate has been abysmal; the presentation of the arguments petty and personal, the cynical attempts to muddy and confuse the issues beneath contempt.

But lets face it, it’s never been about us. It’s largely been about them - our political leaders and their pursuit of power . It’s like a bunch of punch-drunk boxing heavyweights have been chucked in a ring and are so intent on battering lumps out each other that they’ve forgotten the crowd is there.

Jo Cox’s widower, Brendan, gave a moving tribute to his wife. He said of her; She believed in a better world and she fought for it everyday.

Some of her less principled parliamentary colleagues would do well to take onboard that ethic. They have four days before the vote to convince us they can think of something other than themselves.

