Nicola Sturgeon raises threat of second Scottish independence referendum after England votes for Brexit

2016-06-24

Nicola Sturgeon raised the threat of a second Scottish referendum after all 32 areas of Scotland voted overwhelmingly for Remain - a total of 61%.

But after convincing victories in England and Wales for the Leave campaign, the UK as a whole has voted for Brexit .

The SNP lost ground in May's local elections, with the Scottish Conservatives resurgent under Ruth Davidson, sending a new independence referendum to the backburner.

But with Scotland determined Remainers, an Out vote always had the potential for sparking new calls

And the SNP First Minister said: “Scotland has delivered a strong, unequivocal vote to remain in the EU, and I welcome that endorsement of our European status.

 EU referendum results live: Brexit triumphs in historic night as turmoil-hit pound plunges to lowest since 1985 

“And while the overall result remains to be declared, the vote here makes clear that the people of Scotland see their future as part of the European Union.

“Scotland has contributed significantly to the Remain vote across the UK. That reflects the positive campaign the SNP fought, which highlighted the gains and benefits of our EU membership, and people across Scotland have responded to that positive message.

“We await the final UK-wide result, but Scotland has spoken - and spoken decisively.”

Final

Final

At 7am (2 to declare)

At 5am

Former Scottish First Minister Alex Salmond also warned that Scots could hold a second independence referendum if the country - which is pro-Remain - is “dragged” out of the European Union.

The SNP MP told the BBC that there had been “a very strong turn out in Scotland and it’s a very strong vote so far for remain”.

He said: “Scotland looks like it is gong to vote solidly Remain. If there was a Leave vote in England, dragging us out the EU, I’m quite certain Nicola Sturgeon would implement the SNP manifesto.”

The party’s manifesto ahead of May’s Scottish Parliament election said Holyrood should have the right to hold a second independence vote if there is a “significant and material” change in circumstances from 2014.

Tony Blair ’s former spin doctor Alastair Campbell told the BBC: “The breakup of the United Kingdom - I think you are looking at that.”

Nicola Sturgeon “would be perfectly entitled to try and press for a second referendum”, he adds.

“This is not just meltdown in the markets. There is so much going on here.

“I really do feel so angry that we had this referendum.... a lot of it is just people absolutely fed up of austerity and the division in this country.”

A UK exit from the EU in the context of Northern Ireland voting to Remain must prompt a poll on Irish unity, Sinn Fein has demanded.

While the republican party claimed the referendum will have “massive ramifications on the nature of the British state”, given Scotland also voted Remain, the Democratic Unionists hailed the vote as set to deliver a bright future for Northern Ireland as part of an unshackled UK.

A border poll can only be called by the region’s Secretary of State in circumstances where there is clear evidence of a public opinion swing towards Irish unity.

Sinn Fein’s national chairman Declan Kearney said the question of Northern Ireland remaining as part of the UK had now been brought into sharp focus.

“We have a situation where the north is going to be dragged out on the tails of a vote in England,” he said.

“That is a huge democratic deficit for our society, building on the existing democratic deficit of partition.

“The British Government have now forfeited its mandate to represent the north of Ireland in relation to the European Union.”

