Remembering why we have more in Common: Mirror Politics morning briefing

2016-06-20

 Today MPs return to Parliament to pay tribute to Jo Cox . 

The dark cloud of grief will rarely linger so heavily over the Commons chamber.

Some of the words we will hear will be unbearably poignant, others will pierce the darkness with light as colleagues recall someone with such a passion for life.

Inevitably, some contributions will be too mawkish, too laden, too egocentric.

We should allow for all of this.

Grief is hard to handle and not everybody reacts either rationally or with perfect judgement when in its grip.

There will be those on the Brexit side who will dislike any attempts to use the occasion to remind people of Jo’s commitment to Remain.

And it will require sensitivity from those who share her views not too make today too political.

But is incontestable her death has changed the referendum, bringing a much needed perspective to what had been an unedifying campaign.

It would be a shame if, having been forced to sober up, the principal players starting drinking again from the bottle of poison and bitterness.

 We will be running a live blog on the special Commons session which starts at 2.30pm.   The main referendum event today is Jeremy Corbyn’s Q&A session on Sky at 6pm with young voters. 

While the Labour leader usually fares well with this format, only a third of the audience will be pro-Remain with a third for Leave and third undecided.

Nigel Farage and Kate Hoey are attending a “we want our country back” rally in Gateshead tonight.

There is no doubt that Remain are trying to focus attention on Farage.

 It was UKIP’s notorious ‘Breaking Point’ poster which was the final straw for Baroness Warsi and prompted her defection from Brexit . 

 In another boost to Remain, the bosses of four major car firms - Jaguar Land Rover, Vauxhall, BMW and Toyota - all issue statements this morning warning of the dangers of Brexit . 

Other major firms are expected to issue similar comments in the run up to polling day.

* If you would like the newsletter sent to your inbox sign up here : http://www.mirror.co.uk/newsletters/politics-newsletter/

