'Worst day in post-war British history': Political leaders and celebrities stunned at Brexit and Cameron's resignation

2016-06-24

Peter Mandelson has described today's upheavals as "the worst day in post war British history".

His comments come in the wake of British Prime Minister David Cameron resigning after the UK voted to leave the EU.

The former cabinet member also called for Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn to resign, adding: "He seemed to be travelling through the entire referendum with a handbrake on."

Former Labour leader Tony Blair told the BBC: "I' very sad for our country, for Europe, for the world". He called for a "very mature and reflective" response.

UKIP leader Nigel Farage said: "It's right that David Cameron has gone. Not a bad man just on the wrong side of the argument."

Brexit campaigner and former Secretary of State for Work and Pensions Iain Duncan Smith said: “I’m sorry that he’s gone.”

When asked his opinion on David Cameron announcing he is to step down, Trump said: ''Well, that's too bad.''

Rugby Legend Will Carling wrote: "More than just a sinking feeling in my stomach this morning. Can't quite believe what we have voted for."

Clearly upset, Mr Cameron this morning said: ''I love this country and I feel honoured to have served it.''

He said: "Over 33 million people from England, Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and Gibraltar have all had their say.

Comedian Dom Joly was more blunt in his apprasial, tweeting: "David Cameron has resigned so he can spend more time with his pig."

"We should be proud of the fact that in these islands we trust the people for these big decisions.

"We not only have a parliamentary democracy, but on questions about the arrangements for how we've governed there are times when it is right to ask the people themselves and that is what we have done."

But how has the world reacted to this monumental decision?

Golfer Rory McIlroy has asked if the UK can take another shot at 2016 after a chaotic morning that saw Brexit and the PM stepping down.

He told his followers on Twitter that he wanted "a mulligan on 2016" - which in golfing terms is another shot.

His tweet said: "With £Brexit and the way the US presidential race is going... Can we take a mulligan on 2016?"

TV presenter Dawn O'Porter said she was "gutted".

Furious JK Rowling has taken to Twitter to say it will be David Cameron's fault if pro-remain Scots now vote to leave the UK - saying Cameron will be to blame for the break-up of TWO unions. The Edinburgh-based Harry Potter author, a vocal opponent of independence during the 2014 Scottish referendum, spoke out passionately in favour of Britain staying in the EU.

Now, as SNP chiefs decide whether to push for a second referendum after Scotland voted to remain in the EU and England and Wales voted to leave, she has posted: "Cameron's legacy will be breaking up two unions. Neither needed to happen."

Read more: 

War veteran and pro-Europe campaigner Harry Leslie Smith tweeted: " #DavidCameron resigns after causing much harm to Britain and no good."

Scottish Conservative leader Ruth Davidson wrote: "Right for the Prime Minister to offer stability while the country plots its course. Honorable to the last."

Former Tory cabinet minister Baroness Warsi tweeted: "Stunned & deeply saddened that David has decided to resign.

"Simply lost for words. Need leadership more now than ever before."

Michael Fallon, speaking on BBC Radio 4, said: "I think he feels it’s the honourable thing to do. He lost the argument – Michael Fallon on Cameron resignation."

Singers Lily Allen and Ellie Goulding had their say on Twitter, with the former writing: "Well millennials. We're really really f***ed."

Goulding said she was "heartbroken to hear the news" in her tweet.

Footballer and broadcaster Gary Lineker said: "It's not a time for triumphalism. Not a time for division. Not a time for hatred. It's a time for change. A time for calm. A time in history."

Coronation Street star Samia Ghadie told her followers she was "in shock at what this may mean for our country".

The interest in the referendum result has also seen stars from across the Atlantic expressing a view.

American Idol's Ryan Seacrest, the executive producer of Keeping Up With The Kardashians, said: "Shocking news out of UK this morning. Definitely a day for the history books... £Brexit."

