Bankers spend BILLIONS betting on EU Referendum after paying for private exit polls

2016-06-23

Bankers spent billions of pounds gambling on the EU referendum result after arming themselves with advance information though private exit polls, it has been reported.

Hedge funds commissioned private surveys to find out how the nation voted so they could profit from placing big bets on the outcome before it has been officially announced.

It is claimed they used £100 billion war chest of reserve funds to bet on currencies and other markets, in the hope of making huge financial gains before the stock exchanges open in the morning.

Traders in foreign exchange and interest rate markets where the biggest profits are at stake were reportedly asked to stay over night at major banks including Citigroup, Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley.

There was no official exit poll - seen as the most accurate of all polls because it asks voters how they have voted rather than how they will vote - because broadcasters did not commissioning one over fears it would not be accurate.

Instead hedge funds and investment banks threw significant amounts of money at commissioning their own intelligence gathering to give them a better picture of the result.

Billionaire George Soros, who famously made millions by betting against the pound before it crashed, warned earlier this week that a Brexit vote could produce a ‘Black Friday’ as markets react in horror to instability caused by the result.

Bookmakers and financial experts have already predicted a Remain victory.

Alex Donohue of bookies Ladbrokes said: "The chance of a remain outcome is back up to a record high as polling booths shut.

"We're not calling it just yet, but it would seem like leave require a pretty big upset to pull this off."

Kathleen Brooks of City Index said: "The pound has had a cautious reaction to news that the Remain camp might have pipped the Leave camp to the post, according to an unofficial exit poll.

"Traders appear to be sitting on the sidelines though, as we wait for the first set of results due in approximately two hours.

"We mentioned earlier today that the margin of victory could also determine how much the pound would rally on the back of a win for the remain camp."

She predicted a slim margin of 2% could be enough to send sterling above $1.50.

Chris Beauchamp, senior market analyst at online trading firm IG, said: "Financial markets seem to have reached a conclusion, with the pound still broadly higher in overnight markets and FTSE futures pointing towards yet more gains.

"While the race has appeared neck and neck, financial markets have consistently expected the Remain campaign, the status quo option, to emerge victorious.

"With the pound still gaining ground against the euro and having seen a fresh highs against the US dollar for the year, and with the FTSE 100 having bounced impressively in the past few weeks, we would be in for a remarkable night, and an even more remarkable few weeks ahead, should the Leave campaign win through in the end."

