The EU referendum will harm the British pound AND the Euro - whatever the outcome, experts warn

2016-06-20

 Whatever the impact of the referendum, the next 12 months will be a turbulent time for both the sterling and the Euro, claim foreign exchange specialists Rational FX . 

Last summer in 2015, Greece was in the midst of a debt crisis. Just as the country was starting to see economic growth and getting its debt problem under control, the government was ousted and the anti-austerity Syriza party was elected.

 This caused market turmoil, with Syriza insisting that they would not adhere to the strict reforms imposed by the international creditors. 

Huge amounts of Euros were offloaded and their value dropped sharply. As the crisis deepened and debt deadlines grew, the GBP/EUR rate peaked, creating a favourable rate for Euro buyers. Eventually a deal was reached and Greece was offered a new bailout.

This offered some reprieve for the state of the Euro, and some confidence was restored. Subsequently, rates cooled off and settled, continuing to sit around the same level until the end of the year.

The next big rate mover was the European Central Bank (ECB) decision on monetary policy for the Eurozone.

The decision was scheduled for the end of the year and it was widely expected that Mario Draghi, president of the ECB would heavily implement quantitative easing (creating more Euros) to tackle the extremely low inflation which the Eurozone was experiencing, and still is.

A heavy bout of quantitative easing would have devalued the Euro. So in anticipation, it was heavily sold off again, causing the rate to peak for the second time that year.

However when Draghi made the announcement on his decision about quantitative easing, the market had massively overestimated the volume that he wanted to implement.

This led to the Euro being bought back in very rapidly in a knee jerk reaction. Subsequently, the rates dropped by around three cents in one day. This was the start of the downtrend that has led to the current rates we are now seeing.

Up until this point it was the Euro causing most of the movement in the GBP/EUR exchange rate; however the tables turned at the start of 2016.

 The UK began to cause rate volatility with the impending referendum on its membership of the EU. 

Following announcement of the referendum date, confidence began to be questioned as institutional investors saw a possible Brexit as a risk to the value of Sterling.

As the debate rumbles on, the value of Sterling continues to move, with rates moving up or down depending on results of the latest poll.

Analysts predict that a vote to remain would give Sterling renewed strength and propel it to the rates seen at the back end of last year.

However it is predicted that if the vote is to leave, then Sterling could lose short-term value. Whatever the decision, it looks as if there is more turbulence to come for the GBP/EUR exchange rate.

  For more on foreign exchange and overseas money transfer go to Rational FX .  

