The Queen 'asks dinner guests to give her three good reasons Britain should Remain in Europe'

2016-06-21

The Queen has apparently been discussing Britain’s EU membership, asking dinner party guests: “Give me three good reasons why Britain should be part of Europe”, it has been claimed.

Her biographer Robert Lacey wrote he has heard she has been quizzing companions on the subject in a blog he wrote for website The Daily Beast.

He wrote: “And while Buckingham Palace has rightly deplored the impropriety of disclosing Her Majesty’s private remarks, the Palace has been careful not to define her views, nor to deny that her sympathies might, on occasions, like those of many of her subjects, have veered towards Brexit .

“‘Give me THREE good reasons,’ she has, apparently, been asking her dinner companions recently, ‘why Britain should be part of Europe?’.”

Read more: Nick Clegg denies the Queen backed Brexit during Palace lunch row

The blog did not give any details of when The Queen’s questions were asked or to whom.

She regularly hosts lunches and dinners at Buckingham Palace for people from all walks of life.

A royal source said that, if the comments had been made, they sounded more like a question than a statement.

A Buckingham Palace spokesman said that they would not comment on private conversations, that The Queen is “politically neutral” and that the EU referendum “is a matter for the British people”.

Buckingham Palace made the first ever complaint to press regulator IPSO on behalf of The Queen after the Sun posted a front page story in March with the headline Queen backs Brexit .

The palace insisted she was “politically neutral” and the complaint was upheld in a ruling last month with the headline ruled “significantly misleading”.

The Queen does not vote and is politically neutral.

However, in 2014 it was widely suggested she waded into the Scottish independence debate when she told one well-wisher outside Crathie Kirk near her Balmoral estate four days before the vote: “Well, I hope people will think very carefully about the future.”

EU Referendum countdown

Once Scotland voted to remain, David Cameron was caught on microphone telling former New York mayor Michael Bloomberg that she “purred down the line”.

He later apologised, saying: “I am extremely sorry and very embarrassed about it.

“I have made my apologies and I think I will probably be making some more. I am very sorry about it."

