Conspiracy theorist explains why he's sitting outside an EU referendum polling station handing out pens

2016-06-23

A concerned EU Referendum voter has been sitting outside a polling station all day, handing out pens for fear the Government might steal people's votes.

 Brexit -backing conspiracy theorists today sent the internet into minor meltdown with wild ideas about an MI5 plot to steal the referendum from the people, by erasing ballots marked in pencil. 

And Lee Hardwick, of Stockton on Tees, has taken matters into his own hands.

Since the polls opened at 7am today, Lee Dyson, 36, of Hardwick , has been sitting outside the Salters Lane Community Centre in Stockton, lending pens to those who want one.

And he’s going nowhere soon, intending to keep his pen-loan service going until voting ends at 10pm.

 Lee told GazetteLive he got the idea when voting in the recent Police and Crime Commissioner elections. 

“When I went in, it was just pencils and I thought ‘why? There’s no reason?’"

Lee added: “I checked and found out you can use pens, so I decided to make sure other people knew that too by sitting outside today, handing them out.

“They didn’t like it when I first turned up. They tried to move me on, but then I was allowed to stay.

“A lot of people have brought their own pens because of what’s been on the internet, but a lot haven’t and were happy to get one to take in.”

Lee, who isn’t currently working but is a warehouse operative, admits his distrust of the Government, and fears a pencil vote could be rubbed out, are behind his vigil.

But he added: “I’m not swaying people to vote one way or another - that would be against the law and that’s not why I’m here. I just want to ensure everything is fair - there’s nothing else to it.

"Besides, it’s a nice day, I’ve had cups of coffee brought out for me and someone even brought me my lunch!”

Earlier today, police were called to a polling station in Chichester, over a woman handing out pens.

 Brexit supporter Jacqueline Jackson was handing out pens at her local polling station. 

 She even filmed the moment that she was questioned by a police officer, claiming the officer was called by Remain voters who saw her handing out pens. 

 A rumour circulating on social media has gained momentum, causing voters concern that their votes will be 'rubbed out' if they vote in pencil so the referendum can be rigged. 

 The simple fact is that the UK always votes with pencils in elections - but you are allowed to use a pen if you wish. 

The Electoral Commission has tweeted to address the concerns and confirm that nobody has to use them.

 On June 20, voter Kenneth Priestley made a Freedom of Information request on whatdotheyknow.com , asking why the pencils aren't replaced with black pens to avoid potential fraud. 

Jordan Lawrence, representing the Electoral Commission, replied with the following statement:

"The use of a pen or pencil when completing the ballot paper is not specified in legislation.

  Do I need a polling card to vote in the EU referendum?  

 "In the UK, pencils are traditionally used for the purposes of marking ballot papers and are made available inside  polling stations for voters to use. 

"Pencils have been used partly for historic and partly for practical reasons.

Well, no. Jordan continues: "Having said this, there is nothing to stop a voter from using a pen to mark their vote – there is no legal requirement for ballot papers to be marked with a pencil."

Many people are playing it safe and taking their own pens to polling stations just in case, which is totally fine if that's what you want to do.

 A Brexit supporter was quizzed by police today after handing out pens to voters at her local polling station in Chichester. 

She even filmed the moment that she was questioned by a police officer.

Jordan advises: "The use of pencils does not in itself increase the likelihood of electoral fraud: while pencil marks can be rubbed out, similarly, pen marks can be crossed out.

 "What is key is that the integrity of the process from the point that a voter marks their ballot paper to the declaration of the  result is maintained. 

"To this end, the legislation has built specific safeguards into the process, such as the requirement for seals to be attached to ballot boxes at the close of poll.

"By law, candidates and agents are also entitled to be present at that stage and to attach their own seals if they wish.

"At the start of the count, they can then observe those same seals being broken.

"In our guidance we advise Returning Officers to be alert at the count to any ballot papers with anything unusual about them and package these separately to help with any future investigation.

"Tampering with ballot papers is a serious offence and if anyone has evidence or particular concerns that ballot papers are being tampered with, they should report this to the police."

So when you head to the polling stations, use your own pen, use your own pencil or just use the one provided.

Do whatever you like, just make sure you clearly mark your intention.

