Separating Brexit facts from fiction in the EU referendum campaign

2016-06-18

On Thursday, the UK public will finally decide whether or not stay in the European Union.

 The heated campaign has seen both sides accused of “nasty and dishonest campaigning” . 

 And voters have complained of being left confused by the politicians’ rhetoric, with claims made about immigration, the NHS, the economy and even the price of a family holiday. 

 Here, the Sunday People looks at some of the more contentious claims made on both side of the debate to see how they stack up. 

  “Leaving the EU would make us worse off to the tune of £4,300 for every household in Britain by 2030”   Chancellor George Osborne 

The £4,300 figure is based on a Treasury economist’s shaky premise that we end up with a trade deal with the EU that’s similar to Canada’s.

  “Not all public spending cuts would fall on the NHS but it could still be as much as £10billion a year by the end of the decade”   TUC leader Frances O’Grady 

This claim is based on a calculation by the Institute for Fiscal Studies.

But many politicians believe future goverments would take steps to shield the health service from any damage.

  “Two thirds of British jobs in manufacturing are dependent on demand from Europe”    Labour’s Alan Johnson  

Only around 15 per cent of manufacturing jobs are directly linked to demand from the EU.

  “The typical holiday for a family of four to a European destination would go up by £230”    David Cameron  

This is based on the pound falling but is a speculative claim.

  “The UK would need to find between £20billion ­to £40billion to fill the gap through lost tax receipts”   Institute for Fiscal Studies 

This analysis assumes the Government would stick to its plans on spending, tax and borrowing.

But it could make deeper cuts, borrow more or raise taxes.

 Read more: When is the EU referendum 2016 result expected? 

  “The EU now costs the UK more than £350million every week, nearly £20billion a year”   Vote Leave campaign 

A rebate means that in 2015 we paid the EU £13billion, which comes in at £250m per week.

  “When you consider the costs of EU regulation are estimated at £600m a week, you are driven to the conclusion that whatever the reasons may be for remaining in the EU, they are not economic”    Boris Johnson  

He doesn’t say projected benefits easily outweigh these costs.

  “The UK consistently loses in the EU because other members favour a highly regulated and protectionist economy”    Jacob Rees-Mogg  

Since 1999 the UK has been in the minority (voting “No”) on 57 legislative acts. But we’ve been in the majority on almost 2,500 acts.

  “It is not good for our quality of life, it is not good for social cohesion in our society, and our population, inexorably headed towards 70 million or 75 million, will not make this a better, richer or happier place to be”    Nigel Farage  

If we had no migration for the next 20 years we would still reach 70 million – just four years later than Mr Farage’s claim.

  “When the five new countries in the process of joining the EU join, they will have the same rights as other members. Five more countries are in the process of joining, including Turkey”   Vote Leave campaign. 

There are five countries well on their way to joining the EU, Albania, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Turkey.

But any country joining needs a new treaty and that needs agreement from all members. So the UK would hold a veto over any potential newcomer.

