World remembers Jo Cox, who fought against politics of division, with moving birthday tributes

2016-06-22

 The world stopped to remember the life of Jo Cox , the mum, Labour MP and activist who was murdered less than a week ago, on what would have been her 42nd birthday. 

It came a day after the Summer Solstice, which her family always celebrated with a party.

Instead, thousands in London, Nairobi, Paris, Oslo, Manchester, Geneva and her home town of Batley, came together in grief, hope and defiance to “meet hate with love”.

In London, her husband Brendan and young children Cuillin, five, and Lejla, three, joined the crowd of hundreds packed into Trafalgar Square.

 They had made the journey by river on their houseboat along the Thames from where it had been moored near Tower Bridge, towing a small a boat filled with white and red roses, for her beloved Yorkshire and the Labour Party , with the words ‘Jo RIP’ spelled out in international maritime flags. 

The three had made the same journey only a week ago as part of a Remain flotilla, seeing off the Brexiteers’ boats on the Thames. How long ago that seems now.

As Brendan thanked the crowds for their support, a Vote Leave plane cut angrily across the sky drowning out his words. But it could not defeat the message of the day – Vote Love.

At the heart of the event was what Brendan called “a beautiful irony” – that such an act of hatred could cause “such an outpouring of love” for Jo.

“She feared the consequences of Europe dividing again, hated the idea of building walls, and worried about the dynamics that that could unleash,” Brendan told the crowd to passionate applause.

As white rose petals floated in the still fountains, and the crowd held up white signs with the message #LoveLikeJo, speaker after speaker spoke of love.

“Thank you for the love that you have poured on our family since our world collapsed on Thursday,” Brendan said, speaking at times through tears.

“But as amazing and deeply touching as all of this is, I wish I wasn’t here today. Not because I’m ungrateful to the organisers and you all for coming, but because of course I’d rather be with Jo.

“Your support and love has helped us all and I wanted our children to see what their mum meant to all of you. I know that they will remember today.”

He also said he wanted to correct a mistake about Jo which had been widely misreported. “She wasn’t five foot tall. She was five foot one – two on a good day.”

And while recognising his wife’s death has come to take on extra meaning, he also remembered Jo the human being. She was an “awful cook”, a “middle-lane driver” but also “the best mum a child could wish for”, he said.

 

Malala Yousafzai, the Pakistani schoolgirl activist who narrowly survived being shot by extremists on her way to school, also spoke of love.

“We will also love those who consider themselves our enemies,” she said, remembering her friend Jo. “It is hard to love that way”. She also remembered, with a shy smile, that she and Jo shared the common problem of podiums that were too high to see over.

Read more: Labour MPs plead for rejection of 'politics of hate'

Lily Allen sang Somewhere Only We Know, U2’s Bono had recorded a love song. Actress Gillian Anderson read the poem I Shall Stand For Love. Bill Nighy read from Bobby Kennedy. If that sounds more like the line-up for a gig at the G7 calling for the abolition of global poverty, it’s because that was also part of Jo’s world.

Jo was one of the country’s most formidable campaigners both as an MP and before that in the aid world. But so are many of her close friends. Gemma Mortensen, chief global officer of Change.org and Kirsty McNeill, a senior Save the Children executive were always going to go all out for their beloved Jo.

And so, somehow, in less than a week, through their grief, they pulled together an extraordinary gig, that Jo would have loved.

As well as a Yorkshire miner’s banner emblazoned with a picture of Jo, in one of the most poignant moments, Jo’s family were presented with a White Helmet by Syrian search and rescue volunteers the fund set up in her name will go on to support.

“We consider the White Helmet to be a symbol of peace in Syria,” said Raed Saleh, head of Syrian Civil Defence.

As well as a line up of well-known faces who had known Jo through her different causes, the event included the band who had played at her wedding, her son’s school choir singing the anthem If I Had A Hammer, and her favourite song from Les Miserables, Do You Hear The People Sing.

“This week we have heard the people sing,” said host Mariella Frostrup.

Read more: Son of pensioner who tried to save Jo Cox used to teach the MP

The biggest cheer came for Bernard Kenny, the Yorkshire pensioner who was injured when he tried to save Jo’s life. It turned out they shared a birthday – he yesterday turned 78.

The big screen showed Jo’s maiden speech as an MP in the House of Commons made just a year ago when she said the different parts of her Yorkshire constituency were “far more united and have far more in common than that which divides us”.

But most affectingly of all it showed some shaky mobile footage of Jo with her kids. Building a massive snowman. Whooping as they flew down a snowy hillside on a sledge together.

And climbing into the back of the family car, Jo singing “You’ll put your best foot forward and we’ll be back soon”.

For all of us who knew her, the idea that we should “live like Jo” has been one of the hardest challenges of the last few days. However much we put our best feet forward, no mere mortal can live like Jo. She was quite literally extraordinary.

It turned out her friend Gemma Mortensen had the answer. “We will live like Jo because we will love like Jo,” she said.

 www.gofundme.com/jocox 

