Brexit 'would cost Brits £580 a year as price of food, drink, petrol and clothing rocket'

2016-06-20

Brits face soaring food and travel costs, higher taxes, recession and job losses if we pull the plug on Europe, worried experts warned last night.

In a stark message just 48 hours before the EU referendum, Retail bigwigs, economists, car giants and union bosses joined forces to urge people to vote Remain in Thursday’s referendum to prevent the country going into a post-Brexit nosedive they fear will hit millions of ordinary workers.

And leading firms and economists also stepped up their warnings about the perils of leaving.

Analysis by the Usdaw shop workers union reveals families would end up paying on average £580 a year more on petrol, food, drink and clothing if we quit, while the former bosses of the major supermarkets warn “prices will rise”.

The dire forecast came as the Leave campaign was accused of peddling “fantasy economics” by claiming Britain can build up ­alternative deals to our long-standing trade ­agreements quickly.

The experts also warned:

In a major boost to the Remain campaign, the former chiefs of Tesco, Sainsbury’s, M&S, Asda, Waitrose, Morrisons and B&Q said Brexit would mean losing access to the free market and would hit the pound - both of which would push up prices.

The said in a statement: “The single market and free trade are critically important to the strength of the consumer economy.

"Food is always one of the battle grounds for trade negotiations and the idea that we can reshape supply chains which have taken 45 years to build, in two to three years, is delusional.

8%

Amount the UK economy could shrink by 2030 post-Brexit

Source: Analysis by think-tanks the National Institute of Economic and Social Research, the Institute for Fiscal Studies and the Centre for Economic Performance

“Secondly, the value of the pound. In the past two weeks alone, as worries over leaving Europe have increased, the pound has fallen dramatically. This will push up prices.

"A ‘Leave’ vote will very likely make this worse and lead to a further rise in prices - such as the cost of filling a petrol tank, and the price of a weekly shop.

“We strongly believe that a Brexit will see less money in people’s pockets and be catastrophic for millions of ordinary families."

Those supporting the Remain campaign included former Tesco boss Sir Terry Leahy, former Marks and Spencer boss Marc Bolland, and former Sainsbury’s boss Sir Justin King.

The former head of Kingsfisher Sir Ian Cheshire, former Asda boss Andy Clarke, former Morrisons boss Dalton Philips and the former head of Waitrose Lord Price also signed the statement.

A separate analysis by shop workers' union USDAW found families would end up paying on average £580 a year more on petrol, food, drink and clothing if we quit the EU

And Stronger In claimed that if inflation rose by 2.7% following Brexit, the price of a rail season ticket from Birmingham to London would increase by £270, from Ashford to London by £165, and from Liverpool to Manchester by £80.

The warning came as Britain’s biggest car makers yesterday called on workers to back Remain and turned on Leave for claiming they had support of the motoring industry.

Toyota and Ford both sent letters to their staff urging them to vote to stay.

And the Japanese motor giant Nissan announced it would take legal action against Leave for wrongly using its logo on their literature.

In a letter to its 14,000 UK employees, Ford it had “deep concerns” about the “uncertainty and potential downsides” if Britain votes for Brexit.

The carmaker said Britain leaving the EU could cost it hundreds of millions of dollars every year.

It said Brexit could add 10% to the cost of importing cars to the UK and 2.7% to the cost of exports.

“This would significantly impact our business. The time taken to renegotiate trade agreements with the EU and other countries also risks leading to a prolonged period of uncertainty,” the letter said.

£580

Amount annual household bills for food, drink, petrol, and clothing would rise as a result of Brexit

Source: USDAW

The warning was echoed by Toyota, which issued a furious denunciation of Leave for 'repeatedly misrepresenting' its support in campaign literature.

“We do feel it is now essential that we clarify our position given the on-going misrepresentation of our views,” the firm said.

It said free access to the EU was of “critical importance” to a firm that exports 75% of the cars built in the UK to the European Union.

EU Referendum countdown

Having to pay export duties of 10% would lead either to the company having to raise the price of its vehicles or make huge cost reductions, it said.

“New trade agreements may be negotiated but these take many years to agree end the outcome is also uncertain, however we do know that they cannot be better than what we have now, 0% for our main European markets,” it said.

Nissan said it was taking legal action against Leave for putting its logo on an election leaflet.

The Japanese multinational said it wanted Britain to remain in the EU and was issuing legal proceedings to 'prevent them making any further false statements and misrepresentations concerning Nissan'.

A spokesman said: “Use of the Nissan name and logo by the Vote Leave campaign in their materials grossly misrepresents our widely circulated and publicly stated position announced on 23rd February 2016.

“As a global company with a strong presence in Europe, our preference is that the UK stays as part of the European Union.”

The Leave campaign refused to comment.

The heads of three leading economic think-tanks warned of the dire consequences of leaving the EU.

The analysis by National Institute of Economic and Social Research, Institute for Fiscal Studies and Centre for Economic Performance said Brexit would shrink the economy by between 1% and 3% by 2020 and between 2% and 8% smaller by 2030.

Even a 1% drop in GDP would cost the country £19billion - equivalent to £720 for each household currently in the UK, they said.

All three organisations said Brexit would result in lower real wages, higher prices, lower public spending or higher taxes and in the short run, higher unemployment.

They also rubbished Leave’s claim that Britain could negotiate more favourable trade deals outside the EU.

“Trade with EU countries would continue, but it would become more difficult and costly, there would be less of it, and we would be worse off as a result,” they said.

They added: “While we would get to keep our current net £8 billion contribution to the EU budget, overall the public finances would almost certainly be weakened by leaving the EU as a result of a negative impact on the economy.

“Hence in the long run taxes would have to rise, spending fall and/or public borrowing would have to rise.”

In a separate intervention, 12 Nobel Prize winners for Economics and more 150 economists from across the UK said Brexit will likely lead to recession, job losses, inflation, less innovation, higher taxes, and cuts to services.

“Leave will say these points are Project Fear. We say they are Project Reality. The Leave campaign’s economics are built on dangerous fantasies,” the experts said.

Read more: Jeremy Corbyn warns the next 48 hours 'will shape Britain for years to come'

Signatories to the statement include Professor Joseph Stiglitz, Professor Lord Nicholas Stern, President of the British Academy, London School of Economics, Lord Gus O’Donnell, former Cabinet Secretary and Head of the Government Economic Service and Professor Lord Richard Layard, London School of Economics.

The interventions came as a gold-standard opinion poll gave Remain a six-point lead just three days before polling day.

The survey by Nat Cen, conducted between mid-May and mid-June, found 53% backed Remain and 47% supported Leave.

Bookmaker William Hill said it expects £20million to be gambled on the outcome of the EU Referendum.

The last few days have seen the money surge back to Remain, with the bookies predicting there was an 83% chance of remain (1/5) and a 22% of Brexit (7/2).

