Jo Cox's death sparks EU referendum poll surge for Remain as tragedy changes opinion

2016-06-18

Voters became more inclined to want to stay in the EU after MP Jo Cox was shot.

The astonishing finding comes in a ComRes poll for the Sunday Mirror.

And it shows the murder of the 41 year old mum of two could have a direct effect on Thursday’s result.

Our pollsters were asking questions on the EU referendum at the exact time news broke of the attack on the Batley and Spen Labour MP at 2pm on Thursday.

ComRes analysts were amazed when the results coming in after 2pm began to show a marked change of heart.

ComRes

Before Ms Cox was shot 45 per cent of those polled said they would be “delighted” if the UK voted to leave the EU.

Read more: Jeremy Corbyn and David Cameron unite in Birstall to pay powerful joint tribute to Jo Cox

That dropped to 38 per cent after it - and the Remain camp got an astonishing nine point boost from those saying they would be delighted if we stayed.

ComRes chairman Andrew Hawkins said this could indicate a major change in campaign fortunes.

He told the Sunday Mirror: “All it requires is for a marginal change to swing the vote from leave to remain.”

The number of people who said they would be “relieved” if Britain stayed in the EU was running at 35 per cent before the incident in Birstall, Leeds and rose to 45 per cent after it.

Com Res

Those who said they would be “disappointed” if Britain voted to leave rose to 40 per cent from 32 per cent.

ComRes

Those who said they were “anxious” about leaving went up six points to 47 per cent,.

Those who said they would be “upset” to be out of the EU went up five points. while those who said the same about staying went down six points.

Mr Hawkins added: “What is significant is that it all points in the same direction. That tells me we picked up a change in public mood.”

ComRes polled a total of 2,046 people between Wednesday June 15 at 9pm on Thursday.

Most people had answered our questions before Ms Cox was gunned down on Thursday afternoon, but 192 answers came in afterwards.

Mr Hawkins said: “The figures should be treated with a degree of caution given the sample size.”

But he said he was surprised just how much opinion changed.

The ComRes report to us said: “Across ALL factors reaction to Leave vote is more negative post-2pm. Across ALL factors reaction to Remain vote is more positive post 2pm.”

ComRes

With all the results in 44 per cent said they would be “delighted” if Britain decided to leave compared to 28 per cent who would be pleased to remain.

More than two infive said they would be “disappointed” if Britain voted to stay against a third who would feel the same if we left.

When asked to rate the importance of referendum arguments in helping them make a decision nearly eight in 10 voters say the side that is best for future generations.

This is closely followed by around three quarters saying the side best for Britain’s economy and the side that will be best for the NHS.

Six in ten say the side they think will be best at reducing immigration is important in helping them make a decision.

On voting intention the Tories are down two points at 34 per cent, Labour down one at 29 per cent and Ukip up two points at 19 per cent.

Labour voters are crucial to the decision and internal party polling now shows seven in ten will vote to stay in.

John Mills of the Labour Leave campaign said: “We believe Labour voters voting to leave to be as high as 50 per cent.”

A YouGov poll for ITV’s Good Morning Britain today (Sun) will show Brexit leading on 44 per cent with 42 per cent saying they will vote to remain.

Nearly one in ten voters were undecided.

