Britain takes £1.2 TRILLION POUNDING as Brexit vote sends shockwaves around the world

2016-06-24

 A massive £1.2trillion was wiped off share prices on Friday as the bombshell Brexit vote sent shockwaves around the world. 

The pound suffered its biggest drop against the dollar in more than 30 years.

Bank of England Governor Mark Carney said it was ready to unleash £250billion to get lenders through any funding crisis.

And a leading rating agency warned the UK could lose its top notch AAA credit rating, driving up Government borrowing costs just as a slowdown in the economy dents its tax take.

 The threat came amid a stock market meltdown caused by the Leave campaign’s victory in the EU referendum . 

More than £120billion was knocked off the value of the UK’s 100 largest listed firms within the first frantic 10 minutes of trading.

The FTSE initially crashed more than 500 points. However, it later clawed back a large chunk of the losses, closing down 199 points at 6138.

Stock markets in Europe saw even bigger drops amid concern in some quarters that the Out vote here could trigger a similar backlash on the Continent.

Shares in the US also dived, with the Dow Jones index opening down 460 points, or 2.6%.

After a day described by one expert as a “bloodbath”, £1.2trillion had been wiped off the value of the world’s more than 3,000 largest firms that make up FTSE All World Index.

The share slump risks hammering pensions funds on which millions of workers rely, as well as small shareholders and savers. Bank were among the hardest hit, with Barclays’ share price tumbling more than 17%, and Lloyds banking Group slumping 21%.

Joe Rundle, from online trading firm ETX Capital, said: “Leave’s victory has delivered one of the biggest market shocks of all time.

“Panic may not be too strong a word. It’s fair to say we’ve never seen anything like it and the chances are markets will remain volatile over the coming days.”

However, other experts urged caution. Friday’s sharp fall in the FTSE follows a mini-rally earlier this week, as expectations of a Remain vote added £142billion to share prices.

Expert Tom McPhail, of Hargreaves Lansdown, urged pension holders who are a long time from retirement: “do nothing unless you have to.”

He added: “We are likely to experience a period of volatility in the markets and uncertainty in the wider economy, in these conditions, acting in haste is unlikely to serve well.”

However, the sharp drop in the value of the pound will have sooner consequences. Sterling had topped $1.50 late on Wednesday but tumbled nearly 10% to just over $1.30 as the results poured in.

The drop was not as severe as some experts predicted. Billionaire investor George Soros had warned Britain could endure a Black Friday if it voted to Leave, with the pound dropping more than 15% against the dollar.

 However, Dennis de Jong of currency firm UFX.com, said: “The EU referendum has been a cloud hanging over the global economy for the past few months and that cloud has got very much darker.” 

Sterling’s slump will hit the spending power of Britons heading abroad this summer. The weaker pound will also drive up the cost of imported goods but, on the flip side, will make exports cheaper for foreign buyers.

Experts were left fearing the vote could further dent the UK’s economic recovery. Consultants Capital Economics cut its forecast for growth this year from 2% to 1.5% as a result.

Others predicted the Bank of England could cut its base rate - already at a record low 0.5% - later this year if the economy takes a turn for the worse.

Ratings agency Standard and Poor’s warned Britain could lose its AAA credit rating, pushing up the Government’s borrowing costs.

Moritz Kraemer, S&P’s chief ratings officer, said a downgrade was on the cards: “We think that a AAA rating is untenable under the circumstances.”

Two other rating agencies have already stripped the UK of its AAA status.

Figures put last week showed the Government was also forced to shell out £4.6billion in interest on the public sector’s £1.6trillion debt mountain - £700m more than a year ago.

The Bank of England rushed to contain fears that the vote could trigger a new financial crisis. In a speech just before 9am, Mark Carney insisted “we are well prepared for this”.

And he stressed that lenders had amassed a more than £600billion safety cushion of capital which they can call on.

He also revealed it stood ready to swap up to £250billion of assets for cash if banks stopped lending to one another.

The head of business group the CBI sought to allay fears about the impact on firms here.

Paul Drechsler, its President, told the Mirror: “It is definitely a shock but we have known for a long time that this was an issue, that it was finely balanced. We deal in business with setbacks and challenges all the time and we just get on with it.”

However, he warned job growth would be hit.

Investment bank Morgan Stanley was forced to deny reports it was poised to move 2,000 London-based staff to Dublin and Frankfurt on the back of yesterday’s vote.

HSBC previously warned it could shift 1,000 investment jobs to Paris if the UK left the EU.

Britain’s biggest bank refused to comment on the prospect on Friday, although it is believed the decision could hinge on the Government’s negotiations with other EU leaders.

