Remain wins back the lead from Brexit in final two polls before the EU referendum

2016-06-23

The Remain camp swung back into the lead from Brexit last night in the two final polls before the EU referendum.

It came just hours after two polls had given the lead to Boris Johnson's Vote Leave camp.

Analysts said the referendum was too close to call as the polls open in a vote that, whatever the result, will go down in British history.

The final poll by ComRes for the Daily Mail and ITV News gave Remain a 6-point lead over Leave - on 48% compared to 42%.

But ComRes's phone poll of 1,032 people on June 17-22 also underlined the confusion among voters as 11% of people said they were still undecided.

Read more: 

Comres for the Daily Mail/ITV

The final YouGov survey for The Times, which quizzed a massive 3,766 people online on June 20-22, had each side in a dead heat with 45%.

Yet far more of the 8% who were ‘don’t knows’ said they would probably end up picking Remain - meaning it gains the lead in the final result, 51%/49%.

A YouGov spokesman said: “Our current polling suggests the race is too close to call, but the recent trend has been towards Remain, just as other referendums in the past have shown late movement towards the status quo.

“In this poll we asked people who said they didn’t know how they would vote which way they were leaning and re-allocated them on that basis, an adjustment that increased the position of Remain by a point.”

But the spokesman warned: “It is still possible that people will change their mind on the day.”

YouGov/Times

It came hours after two official surveys were published in quick succession on Wednesday night which showed Leave in the lead.

A TNS online poll of 2,320 people on June 16-22 showed a two-point lead for Brexit - with Leave on 43% and Remain on 41%.

Some 11% of voters still said they don't know while another 5% said they don't intend to vote.

ORB/Telegraph

An Opinium poll of 3,011 people from June 20-22, again online, put Leave on 45% and Remain on 44%.

But it found far more people expect the Remain camp to triumph tomorrow (46%) than the Brexit camp (27%). Another 27% don't know how it will do.

ORB/Telegraph

