Will there be an early general election? Calls for new vote after David Cameron resigns

2016-06-24

Britain could hold a new general election as early as the autumn following the historic vote to leave the EU.

A majority of MPs, both Labour and Tory, came out in favour of Remain.

But the result now shows a clear rejection of the consensus among political leaders.

Follow live reaction to the Brexit referendum result here

Humiliated David Cameron has been forced to resign after voters ignored his pleas to stay in the European Union.

There are now calls for a new general election so that MPs from both sides can put forward their plans for what to do next.

READ MORE: 



Cameron said he would remain in his post for a few more months to "steady the ship" until a successor can take over and lead Britain's negotiations with the E.U. on the specifics of its exit from the 28-nation trading bloc.

He said he expected a new prime minister to be in place by October.

Former London mayor and leading Brexit campaigner Boris Johnson is the favourite to succeed David Cameron as Prime Minister, bookmaker Ladbrokes said.

Long-standing Eurosceptic John Redwood suggested Tories should wait to see if Mr Cameron was willing to "implement the public will" after a Leave vote.

Mr Redwood said the PM should bring in talent from the Leave side to build "a new government to bind the country together".

And Conservative backbencher Jacob Rees-Mogg said a general election in the autumn was "not impossible".

Others have suggested March or June 2017 is more likely.

Colin Talbot, Professor of Government and Public policy from Manchester University said: "Britain is now entering a period of severe economic and political turmoil.

"The financial and money markets have already reacted badly. A recession is more than likely."

"Constitutionally the likely result is that Scotland will have a new referendum, and vote to leave the UK, before we have even finished withdrawing from the EU.

"Indeed they have every incentive to do so to try and stay in the EU.

"Politically we are likely to see a major realignment in British politics.

"Tim Farron of the Lib-Dems has already made a pitch for a centre-left realignment around a pro-EU social democratic coalition.

"It is hard to see how the pro-EU Tories will survive.

" David Cameron will be gone within months, not years, and in likelihood Boris Johnson become Tory leader and PM.

"Given the majority of MPs – both Tory and Labour – are in favour of ‘Remain’ a fresh General Election becomes almost inevitable.

"The process of ‘leaving’ is going to be messy and prolonged and there is no consensus amongst the ‘leavers’ about what they want next."

