'Britain’s property market faces a Darwinian future of victims, survivors and predators'

2016-06-24

The London property market “decapitated”, a “toxic” period of uncertainty, and an “all but inevitable” fall in house prices across the country.

That's according to Jonathan Hopper, managing director of Garrington Property Finders.

“The only sure thing is that we can’t be sure of much. The actual process of Brexit is unlikely to be quick or easy, but it’s the prolonged period of uncertainty that will accompany it that is likely to prove most toxic,” he said following the Leave victory in the EU referendum.

“The uncertainty will do little to unblock the supply shortage. Would-be sellers will be more likely to stay put, and this morning’s collapse in the share price of Britain’s largest housebuilders hints at a freeze in new building.

“In normal times constrained supply might drive up prices. But these are far from normal times, and a softening in prices is all but inevitable. The property market is likely to make a cry for help – and the new prime minister will face growing calls to reverse the stamp duty raises.

“Without renewed stimulus, Britain’s property market faces a ‘hard reset’ and a Darwinian future of victims, survivors and predators.”

Worryingly, he's far from alone in his warnings.

“The outcome of today’s EU referendum will create a period of uncertainty among homeowners, buyers, investors, landlords and developers.”

That's the opinion of David Cox, managing director of Association of Residential Letting Agents (ARLA) and Mark Hayward, managing director of National Association of Estate Agents (NAEA).

“We can expect international investors to look a lot harder at the UK as a market; this will have a consequential impact upon the house building sector as investment may be stalled,” they said.

Uncertainty, and it's effect on people making long-term purchases, is a theme taken up by many.

“The only certain point about this outcome is that there will now be uncertainty. There's no doubt that uncertainty causes inaction with some of our customers sitting on their hands in recent months,” said Jeremy Leaf, former chairman of the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors and north London estate agent.

“As we've voted to leave the EU, we're now in unknown territory. Both local and foreign-based customers have told us over the past few months that, until the value of sterling stabilises, decision-making will pause.”

If we take a longer view, however, people are far more optimistic.

“Going forward the UK market will go from strength to strength, perhaps with wobbly knees at it emerges from the clutches of the EU, but it will soon find its feet again,” said Russell Quirk, chief executive of eMoov.co.uk.

Leaf agrees. “The UK and particularly London property markets are long-established and sophisticated so have always attracted investment and should return to some form of normality, whatever that means now, after an initial period of indecision,” he said.

