Man fed up with EU Referendum campaign makes brilliant anti-Brexit poster

2016-06-19

A retired teacher’s home-made EU referendum poster has become the talk of the town thanks to its no nonsense message.

Eugene Nowakowski, from Pontcanna, has become so fed up with hearing what he describes as the “ Brexit nonsense” that he decided he wanted to get his point across in a unique manner, Wales Online reports.

And he certainly did that.

The 66-year-old retired teacher, who has lived in Cardiff for nearly 30 years, created a poster which read: “I remember what Cardiff looked like before we joined the EU. Let’s not go back to that s*** hole.

"Stay in!”

Mr Nowakowski put the poster in the front window of his home on Wyndham Road, and after it was spotted and tweeted by passers-by it has received a huge response online.

Read more: 

Mr Nowakowski said: “I heard Billy Connolly say something similar when he was touring the UK.

"I remember watching him on television when he came to Cardiff and he said: 'Last time I was here in the 60s, this place was a s*** hole'.

“So I was thinking about that when I done the poster and I thought it was quite appropriate.

“When I was a teacher, a lot of students used to say this or that area of Cardiff is rubbish and I would just stand there and think you want to see what it looked like before.

Read more: 

“When we were lads, Cardiff was a different place. It was just a really rough area in parts and you look at it now and it’s just beautiful.

“I can’t say for definite that this is because we joined the EU, but I can’t say that it will get any better if we leave.

“To be honest I’m fed up of this Brexit nonsense. The debate surrounding it is very much impinging on peoples consciousness, especially when race, religion and immigration are being brought into it.

“I just wanted to say something about it and put my point across. I didn’t expect it to get the response that it did - I’ve had people stopping to take pictures of it all day.”

