EastEnders and Coronation Street stars reveal who they're backing in EU referendum

2016-06-22

I’ve filmed all over the world, in some very pretty places and also in some pretty scary ones. I know I’m fortunate in my work but the one thing I always look forward to is coming home.

Because I love my country. And I always want the best for it. Which is why I will be voting to Remain in the EU.

I’ve thought long and hard. It’s a complicated decision and we’re being asked to work out what will happen in the future. Now, I’m known as a tough bloke who has filmed with some of the most dangerous people in some of the most dangerous places on the planet.

Because of this I’m used to making risk assessments. And I’m very worried about the consequences if we vote to leave. I reckon it is very risky. The UK, and Europe, benefits from the EU. By making trade easier, having common standards, giving consumers more choices and workers greater safeguards, the wealth of our country has increased.

EU Referendum countdown

We have more jobs and more families have better living standards. Yes, public services need strengthening. Yes, immigration needs sorting out. But leaving isn’t the way to do it.

The Tories leading the Leave camp don’t believe in the NHS. They’re the ones seeking to make it private. The concept of working together in Europe is right. We just need stronger people in the EU, working to reform it and get rid of its weaknesses. So, I’m voting to Remain in the EU. For the sake of our children and grandchildren.

The EU isn’t something that is easy to get a handle on. For years, the benefits of our membership have rolled along pretty much unnoticed by us. We’ve felt cut off from this mysterious organisation of faceless bureaucrats straightening our bananas, etc (sigh).

The paid maternity leave we now take for granted was a directive from Europe, as was the legislation on discriminating against women returning to work after having children.

The limit on working hours, the slow reduction of the gender pay gap, the protection of women in law against domestic violence and FGM are battles being fought more effectively shoulder to shoulder with neighbouring states.

We are stronger as a global force as part of Europe. It also makes us more outward looking, free to travel and experience neighbouring cultures, as well as enjoying the massive investment in our own arts and culture. There are few artistic institutions that haven’t been part funded by EU money.

But the biggest thing for me is the European Convention on Human Rights, which allows us many of the rights we take for granted, from the right to freedom of movement to the right to a fair trial, from the right to freedom of expression to the right to have fair pay and be in a trade union.

I’d rather the “faceless bureaucrats” were protecting these freedoms than leave them at the mercy of certain governments I could name.

