Leading Brexiteers are trying to con working-class Labour voters - that's why I'm voting Remain

2016-06-17

I’d love to say the clincher was hearing bottle-lobbing England fans tell the French: “Eff off, Europe, we’re all voting out.”

Or the sight of a Remain-supporting MP lying murdered on a pavement.

But what’s made my mind up has been leading Brexiteers, throughout this toxic campaign, trying to con working-class Labour voters into believing their cause is all about them.

That the EU is a Robin Hood in reverse, set up to steal money from the poor and give to the rich. That every economic expert and foreign ally telling us to stay is lying.

That the TUC, Labour Party, Greens, SNP and all the other lefties who think it would be madness to leave, are part of a smug, liberal elite, who want to make the poor poorer.

These words were coming from Old Etonians Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson and Jacob Rees-Mogg. From baron’s son-in-law Iain Duncan Smith and ex-Dulwich College stockbroker Nigel Farage.

From former Oxford Union President Michael Gove, the Lawson Dynasty, Rupert Murdoch and the Daily Mail.

All these rabid free-marketeers who want the NHS privatised, public services decimated, unions crushed and the top rate of tax slashed are now born-again socialists. Look, they’ve even got a red bus to prove it.

As my grandad used to say whenever he whiffed a con: “They’re kidding the goolies off you, son.”

Spen MP Jo Cox calls for Jeremy Corbyn to show 'decisive leadership' on EU referendum

How can you trust people who have had years to prepare for this defining moment in British history, yet have literally no idea what will happen to our currency, trade deals, inward investment, manufacturing, jobs and security if we leave a union which, since we joined in 1973, has seen our economy grow faster than the USA’s, Germany’s, France’s and Italy’s?

They don’t have any answers because their cause is not based on logic but emotion. It’s not about the future but turning the clock back to some pre-war nirvana, when Britain was top dog and everyone here was white and wealthy. It never existed.

Read more: 

This is literally the most ignorant of political campaigns. Ignorant of facts, lacking vision, its only strategy preying on fear of immigrants. And even that is ignorant.

Nigel Farage claims if we leave the EU we can get immigration down to 40,000 a year. Yet last year we let in 188,000 non-EU immigrants. Being outside the EU won’t achieve their goal.

Especially when, if we leave, Brussels will only do a trade deal with us on acceptance of freedom of movement.

They ask what Europe has done for us, and I look around Liverpool and see scores of EU-funded regeneration projects, when the Thatcherite government these Brexiteers worshipped wanted to kill my home city with “managed decline”.

They talk about losing sovereignty, when Westminster’s upper house is the largest unelected decision-making body outside of totalitarian China, and this government was elected by only 24% of voters.

As for us not making our own laws, Iain Duncan Smith has had a good go at that, getting policies on the statute book that cripple the poor, the jobless and disabled. The same people he now says he wants to help.

The EU has its faults, and at another time I may be tempted to leave it. But not now.

Not with this shower of reckless ideological right-wing shysters who want to leave for all the wrong reasons and don’t care about the effect it would have on ordinary British people, because they are comfortable enough to survive a recession.

Shysters like Boris Johnson whose decision to lead Brexit is based solely on a cynical calculation that it can win him the Tory leadership.

I prefer to be an internationalist. I prefer to look at history and see us as a nation that doesn’t walk away from its European allies when there are continent-wide problems to be sorted. I prefer Britain to lead by example rather than withdraw into some small-minded, fearful, insular, backward-looking shell.

Which is why I’ll vote Remain on Thursday.

