Gordon Brown: We've taken Europe from fascism to freedom - don't throw throw away what took decades to build

2016-06-22

This referendum is about more than the future of Britain in Europe: it is about what kind of country we are and aspire to be.

It is about whether we are to look in on ourselves or build our future as an outward-looking, tolerant country engaged with the world.

It is about jobs. More than three million across the United Kingdom are linked to our trade with Europe.

So I say to the mother and father worried about work for their children, to the insecure worker wanting a secure job, to the young person starting out on a career, there is no road to the future, no road to full employment, that does NOT run through Europe.

 On Thursday we take a decision for the next generation. If you want jobs to remain, vote Remain. If you want industries to remain, vote Remain . If you want workers’ rights to remain, vote Remain. 

Let us never forget the rights we have: holiday pay, a maximum working week, consultation on transfers and redundancy, maternity rights and gender equality. These rights are guaranteed across Europe to prevent the good country being undercut by the bad and the bad by the worst in a divisive race to the bottom which benefits only the exploitative employer.

 Do you really believe Mr Gove, Mr Johnson and Mr Duncan Smith, who want a bonfire of laws, would guarantee these rights if we leave Europe ? 

We must not throw away in a day what we have taken decades to build.

 Read more: 

And to those who worry Britain is ‘not the country we were born into’ and is changing out of all recognition i would say that there are TWO views of Britain.

Yes, when under attack we have had to stand alone as at Dunkirk, an island sufficient unto itself. But that was not by choice.

Our choice throughout our history is to be outward-looking, engaged and internationally-minded, open to and able to overcome, as we have, all the world throws at us.

And think of what we have achieved for our safety and security in Europe.

For one thousand years, and in every century but this one and in every generation but ours, a Europe that was at war as nations fought with each other.

And now because of what we did, leading the biggest peace mission in history the guns are quiet, the air still, and swords have been exchanged for ploughshares so that we never have to revert to swords again.

We the British people have not only taken Europe from fascism to freedom.

 Read more: 

We are the British people who gave Europe its lasting foundational statement on human rights, that all who enter Europe have to subscribe to - democracy, human rights and the rule of law.

We are the British people who stood shoulder to shoulder with Eastern Europe when Soviet tanks rolled in and said they too can join if they subscribe to democracy and the rule of law.

And we are the British people when facing the last recession, led Europe - and then Europe led the world - to show that the only way to deal with financial instability and economic turmoil is through co-operation with our neighbours.

What kind of Britain would we become if - having seen the power of co-operation and knowing what co-operation can do to deal with climate change, protectionism, pandemics and growth and high unemployment - we walked away from co-operation and retreated into a corner?

What kind of Britain would we become if - with each of the 28 countries of Europe facing the same threat from terrorism - and with Europe up against Russian aggression, Syrian oppression, Middle East repression and African instability - we tore up our treaties and washed our hands of co-operation?

That is not the Britain I know and love. That is not the Britain I want us to be. And that is not the Britain I believe we, the British people, aspire toward.

I want our country back from those who preach a doctrine of separation and exclusion so that we can unite and not divide, show tolerance and not intolerance and be hate-free instead of hate-ridden - in the way that Jo Cox and millions of others do and have done.

I want Britain to be Britain again in a world that is unstable and insecure and full of risk and where we put ourselves in danger if we do not co-operate and act. And I want us not to walk away from our responsibilities but to be a leader of people and countries.

A Britain which stands not apart in the world but stands tall.

A Britain that is at its patriotic and proud best, playing its proper role on the world stage.

We should be leading in Europe, not leaving it.

