Where was my vote? Teenagers protest outside parliament after being blocked from taking part in EU referendum

2016-06-24

Teenagers furious they'll be 'made to pay' for the Brexit decision of older voters have launched a protest outside parliament.

 A petition before the EU referendum called for 16 and 17-year-olds to be given the chance to shape their country's future in the In-Out vote. 

The petition claimed teenagers would "be dealing with the aftermath of the referendum either way".

But the House of Commons blocked a move by the House of Lords to allowed 16 and 17-year-olds to vote.

Young people were overwhelmingly in favour of remaining in the EU according to opinion polls but a strong backing of Leave by older generations appears to have swung the vote.

The Leave campaign secured 52 per cent of the vote compared to 48 per cent for Remain.

Youngsters have now gathered outside parliament claiming they were not given the opportunity to potentially shape their own futures.

Campaigners held placards asking 'Where was my vote?' and 'Please sir, can we have a voice?'.

Meanwhile, other teenagers have taken to Twitter to voice their frustrations over not being given a say under the #notinourname hashtag

Joe Jenkins added: "Can't wait to live the rest of my life being affected by something I had no legal say in whatsoever."

@jamieppelle added: "Haven't come across a single young person supporting Brexit today. Our future should have been our decision."

According to a YouGov poll taken before the vote, 64 per cent of 18 to 24-year-old's wanted to remain in the EU.

YouGov poll

YouGov poll

In comparison, just 33 per cent of over-65s wanted to remain.

 The UK was split as Scotland and Northern Ireland voted to remain but a large turnout across England secured a Brexit vote. 

Many working-class Labour heartlands and traditional shire Tory voters went against party leaders and voted to leave the European Union.

 The vote has triggered the shock resignation of Prime Minister David Cameron who said in a statement outside Downing Street this morning that the UK needed "fresh leadership". 

