Angry John Barnes phones the news from South Africa to tell everyone he doesn't back Brexit

2016-06-21

 Angry John Barnes has rung up the news from South Africa to tell the world he doesn't back Brexit . 

The ex-England footballer and World in Motion rapper slapped down Michael Gove's claim he wanted a leave vote in a live TV intervention.

Mr Gove quoted an interview Barnes gave a month ago which said leaving the EU might be better for English footballers.

But the ex-Liverpool FC legend said he was stunned to see the Justice Secretary's bold statement in a text from his son - and promptly contacted news channels to arrange an interview.

Speaking from Johannesburg, where he was working during Euro 2016, he told Sky News: “I wanted to be left out of it, unfortunately I’ve been brought back in.”

He said he has a different view to most people on immigration - that the west helped to create the current immigration crisis, and cannot wash its hands of the responsibility.

“If everyone decided to go their own way, where would we all be?" he said.

 Read more: 

“If we are the first to jump ship because the going gets a bit tough...that’s not what we’ve been told being British is about, it’s a very selfish view.”

He added: “I’d be surprised, I’d be flabbergasted if Britain was the first to jump ship.”

Earlier Michael Gove and Boris Johnson both said they didn’t mind that David Beckham had come out for Remain, because John Barnes and Sol Campbell were both backing leave.

But Barnes said people finding themselves “undercut” by Polish workers was a problem with labour laws and unions, not immigration.

“From the immigration point of view I’m supporting Remain even because of immigration - because we have a responsibility to solve the situation that we helped to create in the first place", he said.

“In England we believe that everyone wants to come to England because we’re isolated. That we’re taking in more immigrants than anybody else. The whole problem with the country is immigration.

“We heard that in the 70s and the 60s when we’re talking about black people coming from the Caribbean, taking our jobs because they’re taking all the jobs on the buses - and now we’re having the same thing.

“You cannot base your vote on that because a) that’s not true, it’s a lie. And secondly I think we have a responsibility. We’re talking about Great Britain being great because the last 400 years of our history are showing compassion and showing solidarity.

“And from a moral point of view we have a responsibility to help people.

“The EU has its problems, and I’m not happy with the EU on certain things...but you cannot base your vote on immigration, because it has to be a collective responsibility to help us solve the problem - and Britain should be the last ones to leave because of that problem.”

