Brits are managing to poke fun at Brexit - and the results are surprisingly uplifting

2016-06-24

 We've awoken to a Britain which has opted out of the EU , a country divided, with its currency at a 31 year low, no Prime Minister and a Scottish referendum. 

Regardless of whether it was 'Remain' or 'Leave' which people ticked, there is one thing we can all agree on - there is A LOT going on.

 In these turbulent times, people rely on routine to provide continuity and comfort - and a sense of humour is important too. 

In spite of the grim outlook, people (mostly on Twitter) are managing to poke some fun at what has been an unpleasant outcome for 48 per cent of the country.

Whether it's explaining what it 'means' for us as a nation or simply using GIFS imaginatively, it goes to show we can literally laugh at (almost) anything.

Gutted for anyone who loves fancy French sausage and vats of a nice Bordeaux, it's cold beans and humble pie from now on with imports likely to become a lot more expensive.

 And should you try to dodge 'Thor's wrath', it'll cost you dearly as the pound will be worth less abroad, so those sunny foreign holidays won't come cheap. 

 This GIF essentially explains how the FTSE 100 fell as much as 8.7pc when the London market opened this morning. We're now poorer than France . 

 Nicola Sturgeon has declared a second independence referendum is 'highly likely' as she wants to explore all options to stay in the EU. Still, it's a bit harsh on Marge to have her representing UKIP. 

 In a world gone mad, ITV's decision to cancel This Morning and Loose Women on this morning was been met with outrage from viewers. 

 Read more: What will happen to our driving licences now we've voted to leave the EU? 

 Much of the Leave camp's rhetoric was around immigration . While there are no plans to close our borders, there's probably going to be new rules about who we 'let in'. That includes you too, Thomas the Tank Engine. 

 Is Brexit now the dubious 'inspiration' for European countries' far-right parties' demanding independence? France's Marine Le Pen is making those noises. 

