Michael Gove says he may resign if Britain votes to Remain in Europe

2016-06-21

Michael Gove could resign from the Government on Friday if Britain votes to Remain in Europe.

 The Vote Leave chief told the BBC yesterday he will “reflect and decide what is the best course for me” if his Brexit dream is defeated. 

“I want people to concentrate not on my job but on their jobs,” the Tory Justice Secretary said.

“Of course, depending on what the result is on Friday, I will reflect and I will decide what is the best course for me.”

And his Tory pal Boris Johnson promised to make a live TV apology to the nation if pulling out of the EU does trigger a recession.

It follows repeated warnings from the Bank of England, the IMF and a raft of economic experts that Brexit could shatter Britain’s fragile economic recovery.

Mr Johnson has dismissed the warnings and was asked on LBC radio if he would make a public apology if he is wrong.

The former Tory Mayor said: “Of course I will, of course I will.

“I think I’ve always been pretty humble about everything.”

It came amid revelations that a former BNP member has given almost £600,000 to the official Leave campaign.

Gladys Bramall, a pensioner and ex member of the hard-right group, has been one of Vote Leave’s biggest individual donors according to new Electoral Commission records.

She and her husband Leonard Bramall both appear on a version of the BNP membership list leaked online in 2006.

She said: “My husband joined, he obviously enrolled me at the same time,” she said. “It wasn’t with my knowledge.”

Read more: What are the odds of Brexit?

She donated the huge sum in two chunks - one of £100,000 at the end of April, and a second of half a million two weeks later.

Asked why she donated so much money, she said she’s “very anxious” to get Britain out of Europe.

Speaking on LBC Radio, Michael Gove, who campaigns for Vote Leave, said he does “absolutely not” welcome the donation and will ensure cash from the “tainted source” is returned.

A spokesperson for Vote Leave declined to comment.

But ‘Remain’ campaigner and Tory MP Sam Gyimah said: “It’s extremely concerning that Vote Leave have received so much money from a former member of the BNP - an abhorrent organisation.

“By accepting this money they risk associating themselves with these views, especially following the resignation of one of their board members after she re-tweeted far right material.

“They must now return the donation immediately.”

Vote Leave will claim an extra 261,000 children from EU countries will have signed up for schools in the UK by 2030 if Britain votes to remain in the 28-nation bloc.

Tory Leave campaigner Priti Patel said the demand for more classroom places would put extra pressure on schools which are already “overstretched”.

And it said the increase in school-age European nationals was likely to add between £1 billion to £1.9 billion to the cost of the UK’s annual education budget by 2030.

Ms Patel said: “This research proves that class sizes are already overstretched, with an 8% increase over the last year in the number of pupils in classes over 30.

“These demands will only increase if the UK remains in the EU with no control over its borders.”

