Actress Sheila Hancock's passionate defence of the EU shuts everyone up in the final referendum TV debate

2016-06-22

Actress Sheila Hancock was the only force that could silence the rowdy final TV debate of the EU referendum as she gave a passionate defence of Europe.

There was a moment of shock in the star-studded Channel 4 debate as host Jeremy Paxman told the 83-year-old: "You're getting on a bit".

But the stage legend bounced back - and shushed the warring panellists with a rousing story of the horrors of the Second World War, which she lived through.

After the war the people rejoiced at the noble aim of a united Europe - and "obviously a vision like that was going to go wrong, it was going to have to be worked at very hard”, she said.

But in a tub-thumping monologue she said it was wrong to blame the EU for the problems faced by the whole world today.

Read more: EU referendum recap: Remain wins back the lead over Brexit in final two polls before historic vote 

She said: "It's not just migration, it's a shift of populations, as we had at the end of the war.

"There were displaced people all over the world whose homelands had been bombed to hell and were coming out of camps looking for somewhere to live and we solved it.

"There's ecological problems, environmental problems, there's huge discrepancy between rich and poor worldwide, and that should worry us. Becuase that leads to extremity.

"Surely, surely we can solve those problems better if we're united than if we close ourselves and shut our eyes.

"I am so proud to be British, really really I am. But I am also proud to be European.

"And if I wake up on the weekend and discover I am no longer European I will be heartbroken.”

Tory Jacob Rees-Mogg, ex-MPs Ann Widdicombe and Louise Mensch, Labour MP John Mann and former Chancellor Lord Lawson were among Leave campaigners lined up for Channel 4’s Europe: The Final Debate.

The Remain side included former head of the Navy Admiral Lord West, Green MP Caroline Lucas, Labour MPs Chuka Umunna and Yvette Cooper, the SNP ’s Alex Salmond and Delia Smith.

Nigel Farage pulled out of the show for “family reasons” just hours before voters go to the polls.

The Ukip leader, who has two sons from his first marriage and two daughters from his second, was still reeling from the controversy over his BREAKING POINT poster.

And he was taken to task in his absence by Remain-backing celebrity chef Delia Smith - who was wearing a "let's be havin' EU" T-shirt.

She said the debate was getting “darker and darker” - and the darkest point was Ukip's now infamous anti-migrant image.

Bookended by former Business Secretary Vince Cable and ex-Labour spin doctor Alastair Campbell, Delia thundered: "I didn’t just think it was offensive, I thought it was anti-human."

