Young people won't be able to vote in EU Referendum - but they will have to live with the consequences

2016-06-19

 The next generation of voters are unable to make their voices heard at the ballot box but they will have to live with the outcome of the EU referendum for their entire lives. 

Thousands of youngsters under the legal voting age of 18 are prevented from influencing the outcome of one of the biggest political debates in British history.

A poll published earlier this month showed young people could play a pivotal role in the outcome of the June 23 referendum if they shake off their apathy and vote in sufficient numbers.

Now the Sunday Mirror has visited a sixth form near Bristol and found there is a resounding Remain message among young people.

 And the British Youth Council – which wants the voting age lowered to 16 – declares there are a raft of concerns on the agenda for the next generation, including better mental health services and improved transport links. 

BYC spokesman Rhammel Afflick, 22, said: “It’s a huge shame to see 16 and 17-year-olds will not have the opportunity to take part in such a historic vote, which many politicians have described as a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity.

 “We were really sad to see the Government block the Lords ­amendment last year which was set to see 1.5 million 16 and 17-year-olds enfranchised for the EU referendum. 

Read more: Brexit vote could mean 2 MILLION Brits become illegal immigrants

“Time and time again we’re having to go backwards and forwards on this debate and it’s about time we did what was right for young people living in the UK.

“This is a late but necessary change in our voting system.”

 Earlier this year Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn criticised David Cameron over Government policies affecting students. 

He slammed the Tories for slashing educational maintenance allowance for college students from lower income families.

And he attacked the decision to treble university tuition fees while removing maintenance grants.

Unaffordable housing, poor pay and tackling inequalities are other priorities for young people.

Rhammel said: “The British Youth Council is campaigning to encourage young people to join the debate, register to vote and turn out in large numbers for the EU referendum because It’s our future too. 

"The European Union affects all of our lives and, love it or hate it, you’ve got to get involved.

“It’s our voice and not just our vote that is important and that we are heard before and after elections, not just during them. 

"This referendum campaign has bombarded us with contradictory facts and forecasts.

“However, the British Youth Council has been consistently calling on politicians and campaigners all year round to do more to listen to and act on views and campaigns of young voices.

“We want citizenship education in schools to explain how democracy works – and a voting age of 16 to empower and engage us at a younger age.

 EU Referendum countdown 

“A vote is for the future – not just for the referendum – and we’ll be back after the result to see how they propose to accommodate youth interests, whatever the outcome.

“Leave or Remain, we want better mental health services, votes at 16, measures to tackle racism and religious discrimination, a curriculum for life, affordable transport and good youth services.

“All of these issues have been longstanding priorities for young people, with racism and religious discrimination toping the UK Youth Parliament’s poll of almost one million young people in the winter of 2015.”

