JK Rowling compares EU Referendum campaigners to Lord Voldemort as she pleads for Brits to vote Remain

2016-06-20

 Harry Potter author JK Rowling has compared EU Referendum campaigners to Lord Voldemort, in a plea for Britain to vote to Remain. 

 And she accused Ukip leader Nigel Farage of using Nazi-style propaganda in his campaign posters. 

In a statement published on her website, she wrote: "I'm not an expert on much, but I do know how to create a monster."

She goes on to explain that fictional bad guys all share certain traits - "they commit atrocities without conscience and cannot be defeated by the ordinary man or by conventional means. Hannibal Lecter, Big Brother, and Lord Voldemort: all are simultaneously inhuman and superhuman and that is what frightens us most."

She explains that both sides of the campaign have "told stories", appealing to our need to make sense of the world through storytelling, and by creating monsters to stir up our deepest fears.

She wrote: "The Leave campaign's narrative has descended to this: we are being exploited or cheated by the EU. If we can't see that Britain will only regain superpower status if we leave the union, we must be unpatriotic, cowardly or part of a corrupt elite.

 "Remainers have mostly countered, not with an optimistic vision of the union, but with bleak facts: money is pouring out of the country at the prospect of the Brexit and experts in every field think that leaving the EU will be a catastrophic mistake. Be afraid, says Remain, turn back while there's still time: you are hurtling towards a precipice. 

"However, Remain are finding many ears closed to their grim prognostications. The economic crash of 2008 left a pervasive feeling in its wake that financial institutions are not to be trusted. 'The establishment' has become a term of blanket abuse. We live in a cynical and insecure age. Trust in disinterested sources has been shaken, while popular culture glorifies the hunch and the gut feeling. In America, they call this 'post-truth politics'. Forget the facts, feel the fury."

She went on to say the Leave campaign are "fanning" widespread cynicism with the political process and portraying the EU as not just imperfect, but villainous.

And she accused Nigel Farage of using Nazi-style propaganda in his posters.

She wrote: "It is dishonourable to suggest, as many have, that Leavers are all racists and bigots: they aren't and it is shameful to suggest that they are. Nevertheless, it is equally nonsensical to pretend that racists and bigots aren't flocking to the 'Leave' cause, or that they aren't, in some instances, directing it. For some of us, that fact alone is enough to give us pause.

"The picture of Nigel Farage standing in front of a poster showing a winding line of Syrian refugees captioned 'Breaking Point' is, as countless people have already pointed out, an almost exact duplicate of propaganda used by the Nazis. "

 Elsewhere in the missive, she compares the Leave campaign's rhetoric to that used by Donald Trump in the US election campaign, and says she understands the call to vote leave could be a "howl of frustration". 

But she says: "No, I don't think the EU's perfect. Which human union couldn't use improvement? From friendships, marriages, families and workplaces, all the way up to political parties, governments and cultural economic unions, there will be flaws and disagreements. Because we're human. Because we're imperfect.

"So why bother building these ambitious alliances and communities? Because they protect and empower us, because they enable bigger and better achievements than we can manage alone. We should be proud of our enduring desire to join together, seeking better, safer, fairer lives, for ourselves and for millions of others.

She concludes: "The research demonstrates that we don't know what we've got. Ignorant of what it gives us, we take the benefits of EU membership for granted. In a few days' time, we'll have to decide which monsters we believe are real and which illusory.

"Everything is going to come down to whose story we like best, but at the moment we vote, we stop being readers and become authors. The ending of this story, whether happy or not, will be written by us.

  You can read JK Rowling's full statement here  

 EU Referendum countdown 

