Nigel Farage says Remain 'will edge' EU referendum result as YouGov poll shows 4-point lead for In vote

2016-06-23

Nigel Farage appears to have conceded defeat at exactly the moment the EU referendum polls closed tonight.

In an extraordinary statement he told Sky News: “It’s been an extraordinary referendum campaign, turnout looks to be exceptionally high and looks like Remain will edge it.

“UKIP and I are going nowhere and the party will only continue to grow stronger in the future.”

An on-the-day poll by respected outfit YouGov has given Remain a four-point lead - on 52% to 48%.

It is NOT an exit poll but DID ask people how they’d voted, so it’s very similar to one.

  

YouGov reinterviewed people it last spoke to yesterday to ask how they’d voted and found a “small move to Remain”.

Joe Twyman, YouGov’s Head of Political and Social Research: “Today YouGov conducted a survey, going back to the same people we spoke to yesterday to find out how they actually voted.

“The survey found a small move to Remain and based on these results we expect the United Kingdom to continue as a member of the European Union.

 “The results are close and it too early to call it definitively. But these results, along with the recent trends and historical precedent, suggest a Remain victory is the more likely outcome.”  

  

 Polls have closed in the EU referendum after a final push by the Remain and Leave campaigns - and results start rolling in just after midnight. 

 Our live updating graphic below shows the progress of each side below and you can see our guide to what to look out for here. 

The news comes as Boris Johnson appears to have conceded defeat.

An unconfirmed claim from Lewis Iwu on Twitter, who says he’s bumped into Boris Johnson on the London Underground.

“Just been asked on tube by @BorisJohnson if I voted leave. I say no,” he writes.

“He concedes He’s lost anyway. Awkward #EUref”.

But Tory Leave campaigner Iain Duncan Smith dismissed Mr Farage’s words and said it was far too early to make a call.

And he said turn-out was sky-high in the working class areas where he was hopeful many people would be voting Leave.I don’t have a sense (of the result), he said. “We’re in uncharted territory here.

“I never quite follow what Nigel Farage says.

“But I have picked up on the fact turn out is very very high in council estates where normally it is 30-40% for a general election.”

Education Secretary and Remain campaigner Nicky Morgan agreed it was too early to call but said the country must come back together after the result.

“I thinks passions have run high on both sides,” she said.

