Nigel Farage has done nothing for Britain - our best hope is he resigns and stays gone this time

2016-06-20

 A moment's silence, please, for the political career of Nigel Farage. 

 Not only is he single-handedly destroying his own lifelong dream of leaving the European Union, but he doesn't even realise he's doing it. 

 It's all someone else's fault. It's the migrants, the Tory wets in the Leave Campaign, or because Jo Cox was killed. 

The truth he can't see is there's no-one else in public life quite so capable of causing widespread disgust with such apparent ease.

It became apparent when the referendum was first called and experienced politicians moved heaven and Earth not to let him near it.

 Nigel responded by saying the Vote Leave campaign had "fundamental problems", was spending too much time talking about the economy and trade, and ought to bang on more about immigration. 

 He "begged" to join but when they refused he said: "It's up to those of us who the official Leave campaign don't wish to use to go out round the country and make our own noise." 

Say what you like about career politicians but they know how to win elections.

If even Boris Johnson thinks someone a dangerous liability then it's probably best not to let that person outside without a carer and some tranquilisers.

So Nigel and a few others were sidelined. Rather than be quiet and let the big boys get on with it, they decided to back the Grassroots Out group which focused more on migrants.

 They not only splintered support but at least two Tory MPs have been paid a total of £40,000 from GO for providing their services as chief executive and accountant. 

 Both groups applied to be the official campaign, and when the Electoral Commission went against them GO threatened legal action, as frustrated idiots so often do. 

Denied recognition and the public cash that went with it, Nigel looked at his box and still saw no reason to get back in it.

 So Nigel picked a fight with Barack Obama who totally ignored him; warned of Cologne-style sex attacks from migrants; claimed Britain didn't need trade deals with the EU; horrified fellow campaigners by complaining about diversity; made Alesha Dixon want to be somewhere else and cancelled an illegal pop concert. 

 More recently he's started saying he never said all the things people accurately recorded him saying. 

 This month alone he's waged a river battle with Britain's only living saint which included turning hoses on two small children in a dinghy; was reported to the police for his latest poster; and blamed the uproar it caused on the death of a mum-of-two rather than, oh I don't know, whoever decided the main flaw in Nazi propaganda was that it was wasn't in colour. 

 In short Farage is a disaster for anyone who wants to leave the EU. Every time he opens his mouth he manges to say something dafter than the time before, including admitting that no-one likes him. 

 Just standing next to that poster will have been enough to convince a large chunk of voters they didn't want to back his team. 

That's before you look at the fact he insists he didn't go to 42 out of 43 EU fishery committee meetings "because you can't change anything" and the only way to cut immigration is to leave the EU.

You won't change anything at all if you don't turn up to argue, Nigel, and furthermore if we leave the EU:

a) All the migrants will be in Dover before we can check their credentials

b) If they claim asylum then we can't deport them

 c) The Australian-style points system he keeps banging on about is designed to INCREASE migration 

Add to that the fact he's dense enough to blame reasonable criticism on a murder victim and to any impartial observer the man's a disaster.

Hell, even to that half of the country which wants to leave the EU Nigel is doing a very good impression of a man paid by David Cameron to destroy the Brexit campaign from the inside.

 And now we're four days from the vote, his side are losing in the polls, it's revealed the undecideds break 2 to 1 in favour of Remain and even Brexiters are starting to say we'll be staying In. 

For a man who's had 30 years to work on this, Nigel's shown a level of incompetence not seen since Graham Taylor thought he could teach the England team a thing or two.

 He has the opposite of the Midas touch - everything he touches turns to crap. He's got the sensitive skin of a cosmetics-abused bunny wabbit and all the political nous of Edwina Currie in an inattention spiral. 

So whether you are pro or anti the EU, the best possible thing to do on Thursday is vote to remain in it.

 Because that is the only way you can hope to be rid of a man who insists he's not racist while fomenting it in others, who makes those with reasonable points sound like Nazis, and who has done more to damage Britain's relationship with Europe than anyone else.

Nigel's greatest contribution to public life has been to split our nation down the middle in an argument most of us didn't want or care about.

He's got colleagues and families and friends arguing. He's split the Conservative Party, kneecapped the Cabinet and infuriated the Archbishop of Canterbury.

Not bad, from a man married to a migrant with a bilingual household. But ultimately not very helpful either.

After this is over we have to forget the rows and live with a government that's been eviscerating itself for months.

Our best hope, right left or don't care, is that Britain votes to Remain in such numbers this man and his pompously ignorant self-belief are banished forever to his golf club bar where all he can unresign from is the crisps committee.

Nigel's done nothing for any of us and not much for himself, either. Vote to leave him where he belongs.

