Jeremy Corbyn says he won't be blamed for Brexit as he makes the sceptic's case for Remain

2016-06-20

Jeremy Corbyn tonight denied he would be held responsible for a Brexit vote in his only TV grilling of the EU referendum campaign.

The Labour leader has faced claims he lacks enthusiasm for staying in the EU ahead of Thursday's crunch referendum.

But speaking to young voters, he rubbished suggestions it would be his faulty if Labour voters chose to quit the 28-nation bloc.

"I'm not going to take blame for people's decision," he told Sky News.

"Whatever the result, that is the result of the referendum - we have got to work with it.

"I would say to the European Union - whatever the result - I want to see better working conditions across Europe, I want to see better environmental protections across Europe.

Read more: EU Referendum live

"I want to see a trade policy that doesn't export pollution by importing goods that have been made in a deeply polluting way."

The Labour boss also denied that meeting European leaders since seizing the party reins last September had changed his mind over the EU given his past euroscepticism.

"My head's not been turned by anything - my head doesn't get turned," he said.

"My socialist views are totally unchanged."

Mr Corbyn also admitted he was "not a lover of the European Union" but had decided to vote Remain because "it's a rational decision to stay".

He doubted the flagship EU-US trade deal, the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (Ttip) would go ahead, saying there was "a chance it might never see the light of day".

And he said he "doubted" young voters understood the referendum because of an overload of chatter from the "political classes".

One audience member turned on him over backing Angela Merkel's policy to let in all refugees - despite thousands dying making the trip across the Mediterranean.

But he says the German Chancellor’s policy was a “human response”.

“There are very detailed checks on everyone applying for refugee status,” added the Labour leader. “I’ve been dealing with these cases for 30 years.

“The idea you can just walk into a country, announce you’re a refugee and get status is far, far, far from the reality of it.

“Someone seeking asylum is a human like us, and they’re here to make a contribution.”

The iconic British Mini was designed by a refugee, he said.

And next month he will be attending a meeting of socialist parties in France about how to do more for refugees.

Labour's leader joined other MPs in tearing into Nigel Farage’s campaign poster, showing a line of people walking to a refugee camp under the words BREAKING POINT.

“There should be a humanitarian response, not the bigoted response of putting up a 32 sheet poster saying a group of desperate people are somehow a threat to us,” he thundered.

