EU Referendum results fallout explained: What we know so far after Britain votes for Brexit

2016-06-24

Britain has voted for Brexit in the EU Referendum after a historic and monumental night - and David Cameron has confirmed he will stand down as Prime Minister.

Remain jitters grew as votes stacked up for Brexit, bellwethers like Caerphilly, Coventry and Eden returned Out votes and Leave campaigners declared they thought they had won.

Unlike the general election, every vote counts so regions do not matter. It comes down to pure numbers and who has more votes.

Within hours of the counts beginning some key themes had begun to emerge, with the fallout and finger-pointing starting before the result was even known.

And when Brexit was confirmed, everything changed for Britain. 

Here are the themes that emerged as the night went on.

David Cameron nailed his colours to the mast of the Remain campaign - so when the ship was torpedoed by Vote Leave's winning campaign, the PM looked doomed. 

But with the immediate turmoil of the Brexit vote only just beginning, the question was whether he would resign immediately. 

Yes and no. At 8.15am he emerged from 10 Downing Street to deliver a statement declaring he would step down, but continue to steer the ship until Tory party conference. 

He said: "I will do everything I can as Prime Minister to steady the ship over the coming weeks and months but I do not think it would be right for me to try to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination.

"This is not a decision I've taken lightly but I do believe it's in the national interest to have a period of stability and then the new leadership required.

"There is no need for a precise timetable today but in my view we should aim to have a new prime minister in place by the start of the Conservative Party conference in October."

Nearly two thirds of Brexit-backing Tory MPs had sent a letter directly to Mr Cameron saying he should remain in office, but when the devastating result came in the Prime Minister clearly felt he could not continue.

David Cameron had previously said he would invoke Article 50 immediately after any vote for Brexit - but he said he would leave it to the incoming Prime Minister. 

He said: "A negotiation with the European Union will need to begin under a new prime minister and I think it's right that this new prime minister takes the decision about when to trigger Article 50 and start the formal and legal process of leaving the EU.

"I will attend the European Council next week to explain the decision the British people have taken and my own decision."

Boris Johnson is an obvious contender after his leading role in the Vote Leave campaign. Michael Gove, the straight man in their double act, may also stand to be the next leader of the Conservative party. 

Nicky Morgan is considering a leadership bid, plus Theresa May, Stephen Crabb and Andrewa Leadsom are all likely to weigh up running for the top job. 

The FTSE100 plummeted 500 points in 10 minutes after opening this morning, wiping £124billion off the value of the UK's biggest businesses.

The reduction in value of the businesses means France has overtaken Britain as the world's fifth biggest economy. 

The price of the pound against the dollar had plunged overnight as Leave votes started to be announced in regional counting centres. 

Both sterling and shares have rebounded from their low points, but the market is likely to remain volatile. 

Bank of England governor Mark Carney says "some market and economic volatility can be expected" in the wake of the Brexit vote, but the Bank is well prepared. It also has £250bn to support the UK economy.

The Ukip leader's single biggest ambition has been achieved - and he made sure the world knew, making repeated appearances throughout the night and in the aftermath of the official result. 

And he topped it off by calling for June 23 to be a national holiday because it will "go down in our history as our independence day".

Before his triumphal morning crowing, Nigel Farage had endured a flip-flopping evening. 

As the polls closed at 10pm, he appeared to concede defeat after a final YouGov poll published at 10pm gave 52% to Remain and 48% Leave.

But less than two hours later he rowed back and said the result could still go either way.

He said even Leave won less than half of the vote “whatever happens tonight, whoever wins the battle, one thing I am certain of is we will win this war". Although he did confirm he voted in pen.

A week after Labour MP Jo Cox was shot outside her constituency surgery, Nigel Farage declared Brexit had been won "without a single shot fired". 

The regional differences in attitude to the EU were increasingly stark.

 All 32 areas in Scotland backed Remain with a total of 62% of the vote

 But 17 out of 22 areas in Wales backed Brexit to the shock of campaigners in Labour heartlands. Overall the victory for Leave was slim in Wales with 52.5%.

More than a million people voted in Northern Ireland, which backed Remain with 56% of the vote.

It prompted calls for new independence votes by politicians in Sinn Fein and the SNP. 

Leave also won in other Labour heartlands including Sunderland, Birmingham, Sheffield, Swansea, Darlington, Rotherham, Coventry and Stockton.

Remain won in big cities including Liverpool, Leeds, Glasgow and Edinburgh but turnout was not high enough to give Leave momentum

At 7am (2 to declare)

Final

Final

At 5am

First Minister Nicola Sturgeon said the option "must be on the table and it is on the table" as the Brexit vote represented a sufficient change in circumstances from the independence referendum of two years ago.

The United Kingdom Both regions voted for Remain, with Sinn Fein raising the prospect of a united Ireland and Spain calling for Spanish flags on Gibraltar.

Britain's decision to quit the EU has given added impetus to campaigns in other European countries for them to hold their own referendums on membership. 

France, Italy and the Netherlands all have movements calling for a vote - so could we end up with Frexit, Itexit and Holexit?

EU president Donald Tusk declared his intention not to lose any more nations, stating: "We are determined to keep our unity as 27 ... I will propose that we start a period of wider reflection on the future of our union."

Nigel Farage admitted the £350million promise for the NHS plastered all over the official Vote Leave bus and other campaign material was a big mistake. 

Daniel Hannan warned there was no silver bullet on immigration and Liam Fox backtracked on Article 50 - and that was all before breakfast.

Turnout in Leave areas was massive - while in some of Remain’s biggest strongholds, turnout was dismally low.

This is crucial because every vote counts. So low turnout in a Remain stronghold means thousands of fewer votes for that cause.

And worst of all early on was Glasgow city, where turnout was a cringeworthy 56.2%.

Glasgow City was supposed to be the third-biggest area by population in the whole of the UK with 449,731 people eligible to vote.

And analysis of the British Electoral Survey said it was meant to be the seventh-favourite Remain stronghold with a 39-point lead.

The highest turnout a couple of hours in was a staggering 76% in Kettering, six out of ten of whose residents voted for Brexit.

Labour heartlands plunged towards Brexit.

Sunderland was the first to declare and kicked off a storm of Labour areas declaring for Brexit with huge turnout.

Swansea shocked Remain campaigners by voting 52% for Leave on a 70% turnout.

Redcar and Cleveland, the site of a failed steel plant, voted 66% for Brexit - again on a 70% turnout.

In Bury 71% of those eligible turned out and voted for Brexit by a margin of 54% to 46%.

Blaenau Gwent, Hartlepool, Wrexham, Birmingham and Middlesborough all voted for Brexit too.

The poor showing for Remain in Labour areas, and the party leader's often lacklustre enthusiasm for the EU have brought a motion of no confidence in Jeremy Corbyn.

Dame Margaret Hodge and Ann Coffey submitted the motion, with Dame Margaret calling on Mr Corbyn to "do the decent thing" and stand aside - less than a year after he was elected.

Good news, everybody - Lindsay Lohan has waded into the EU debate .

The Mean Girls actress posted a video on her Instagram account shortly after it was revealed Sunderland had voted to leave the EU.

Leave won more than 61% of the vote in the northern city.

Shortly after, Lindsay, who is backing the 'In' campaign, posted a bizarre video of her and a few pals as they sat around watching the news on TV.

Following on from the video, Lindsay then took to Twitter.

"#REMAIN Sorry, but #KETTERING where are you & why is this woman @BBCNews speaking on people rather than TELLING us what happens if UK LEAVES?

"I love the #shetlands @BBCNews thank goodness we have pure hearted people our side #besmart #ShetlandsVSSunderland #BringItOn."

SNP politician Stewart McDonald then replied to her bizarre tweetes with this Mean Girls reference: "You can't sit with us."

A host of public figures have given their verdict on the result.

Another vote, another year of wondering why we spend so long looking at polls.

An on-the-day poll by respected outfit YouGov gave Remain a four-point lead - on 52% to 48%.

But recent forecasts have the vote going in the opposite direction, with Leave projected to win as the votes flow in.

And the usually reliable betting markets also got the result drastically wrong, giving the Remain campaign a comfortable lead throughout the campaign - right up until the results started coming in, that is.

