Victoria Beckham 'so proud' of David as she joins him to back remaining in the EU

2016-06-21

Victoria Beckham has come out in support of Remain in the EU referendum - after previously voicing strong opposition to a federal Europe.

She tweeted in support of husband and England footballing legend David Beckham, who confirmed this morning that he'd be voting In on Thursday.

The Manchester United star posted on his Instagram and Facebook accounts, saying the legendary squad he was a part of was vastly improved by European players. 

And he said he wanted his children and grandchildren to grow up in a vibrant, connected world.

This morning, Victoria tweeted: "So proud of David. #Remain x VB"

 But backing Remain marks a change in opinion for the former Spice Girls singer.

In an interview with the Spectator in 1996 at the height of Girl Power - and before she even met David - Victoria revealed some very strong opinions about the European Project. 

Described by journalist Simon Sebag Montefiore as "the Bill Cash of the group", Posh Spice revealed - quite eloquently - her disapproval of the EU, and specifically the idea of a single currency.

She said: "The whole European Federal plan is ridiculous. We are patriotic. The single currency is an outrage. We want the Queen's head — or the King's head if we have a king — on our own coins."

 Read more: Spice Girls 20 years on and the story of girl power from behind the scenes by those who were there 

"It's been a terrible trick on the British people," said Victoria, reportedly outraged by "the impertinence of the bureaucrats in Brussels. The Euro-bureaucrats are destroying every bit of national identity and individuality.

 And she was upset about passports having "European Union" on them long before Nigel Farage started waving his about. 

"Let me give you an example — those new passports are revolting, an insult to our kingdom, our independence. We must keep our national individuality."

Elsewhere in the interview, bandmate Geri Halliwell presciently called for a referendum on the Maastricht treaty.

 EU Referendum countdown 

