JK Rowling wishes for magic to reverse EU referendum result as celebrities wake up to Brexit

2016-06-24

Celebrities have flocked to Twitter to voice their thoughts after Brexit triumphed following a tense EU referendum.

Seemingly everyone in the country had their say on whether Britain should remain in the EU or leave the EU.

And just as they shared why Britain should either leave or stay, they've now returned to Twitter to react to the historical vote.

Those who voted to Remain were obviously most vocal, with Harry Potter author JK Rowling writing: "I don't think I've ever wanted magic more."

She followed that up with: "Scotland will seek independence now. Cameron's legacy will be breaking up two unions. Neither needed to happen."

Brit funnyman James Corden shared: "I can't get my head around what's happening in Britain. I'm so sorry to the youth of Britain. I fear you've been let down today."

Lily Allen said she had been crying since the Swindon vote, backing Leave, was called.

"How's that stronger economy and NHS looking?" she added. "Well millennials. We're really really f***ed. How's that stronger economy and NHS looking ? (sic)"

While Alexa Chung posted a string of expletives followed by a broken heart emoji.

Lord Alan Sugar replied to a fan saying he has "no words".

When someone asked him why he was worried, he wrote: "Not for me. For you and the young generation."

Chloe Madeley called for people to "hope for the very very best now", adding: "Find someone INTELLIGENT, someone you you LIKE, someone you RESPECT, who was vote leave, and ask them WHY it's going to be a good thing (sic)"

Stephen Merchant managed a joke: "Trump said leave. Scottish said remain. If this triggers secession, Scots should stay in, just to keep Trump's golf course in the EU. Smirk."

EastEnders' star Jacqueline Jossa added: "I fear for th future now, but who knows really? #EUFRefResults (sic)"

Meanwhile, those who were voting to leave the EU, took to Twitter to share their excitement.

The biggest celebrity champion of Brexit , Katie Hopkins, wrote: "Today, a new dawn. And a brilliant, brave Great Britain. Congratulations to everyone on the RIGHT side of history #Leave #EURef."

Liz Hurley wrote: "And suddenly the birds are singing.....still glued to the TV though #Brexit (sic)"

And UKIP leader Nigel Farage shared: "We've got our country back. Thanks to all of you. #IndependenceDay."

