Cost of your foreign holiday soars as pound plunges to 30-year low after Brexit

2016-06-24

UK holidaymakers travelling abroad will pay more for foreign currency as the pound plunged to its lowest level since 1985.

Sterling was down against every single major currency group following the EU referendum.

The pound crashed 10% against the dollar overnight to 1.33 US dollars, a low not seen in 30 years.

Back in November, if you took a trip to the United States, you could cash in £100 for $152.90.

If you took another trip in early May, you’d have got $144.80 - more than £5 less.

This morning, you would get just $133, meaning your money has lost around 15% of its value within months.

Travel organisation Abta warned during the referendum campaign that foreign travel was "likely to become more expensive" following Brexit.

It published a report which stated that holidaymakers and business travellers may face increased costs if an exit vote leads to a fall in the value of sterling.

Meanwhile travel businesses may also raise prices in order to recoup the cost of new taxes and levies being introduced.

Another potential factor which could make travel more expensive is consumers needing to cover additional insurance costs if the UK leaves the European Health Insurance Card scheme, according to the report produced with economic analysis by Deloitte.

The research concluded: "In the longer term, following a Brexit, travel is likely to become more expensive."

The question for most voters, though, is what happens in the longer term, and that’s harder to predict.

Britain already has a separate central bank, so financial decision making can carry on much as before. This should give investors some confidence.

On the other hand, many economists are warning that Brexit Britain could fall into a recession that is hard for a central bank to control.

If investors feel gloomy about the prospects for the British economy , we could see the pound remain weak for a long time.

It depends who you are. For holidaymakers, or anyone ordering products from abroad, it means having less spending power.

But it could make the UK a more affordable destination for overseas tourists.

And if you're a British pensioner living abroad, it would mean less income to survive on each month.

If you run a business and you’re selling to customers abroad, your wares will automatically become cheaper - and should make you more competitive.

