'Obscene' Brexit campaigners spark outrage by flying banner over Jo Cox's birthday memorial service

2016-06-22

Brexit campaigners have sparked outrage by flying a campaign banner over a memorial service to Jo Cox.

Two planes, one trailing the sign "Take Control: #VoteLeave," could be heard over the crowd in London's Trafalgar Square while the MP's grieving husband Brendan gave a grief-stricken speech today.

Those behind the stunt were branded "disgusting" and "sick f***s" on Twitter as angry murmurings were heard in the thousands-strong crowd.

The banner belonged not to the official Brexit campaign but aircraft manufacturer Britten-Norman, based in Southampton and on the Isle of Wight.

The firm sent its "sincere apologies" to all those offended tonight and appeared to blame air traffic officials for not informing them of the memorial.

Read more: 

But Unite assistant general secretary Steve Turner said it was unbelievable the Leave planes flew over three times.

"You couldn't print what I really want to say," he told the Mirror in Trafalgar Square.

"It was a grotesque, obscene insult to the memory of a woman who was so much better than them and believed in the fairness and justice lacking in the worst aspects of their campaign."

Labour MP Stella Creasy told the official Brexit campaign: "Flying your plane over the memorial tribute to Jo Cox in Trafalgar Square is beyond low. Have some self respect and disappear!"

Remain-backing Tory MP Nicholas Soames said: "What absolute sh**s".

It came as Mr Cox said his wife would have spent her birthday today "bashing around the streets of her home town trying to convince people Britain was stronger in Europe."

He added: "She feared the consequences of Europe dividing again.

"She hated the idea of building walls between us and worried about the dynamics that could unleash."

A spokesman for Vote Leave, the official Brexit campaign, said: "This wasn't our plane so we had no idea it would fly over the memorial service. Had we known that these people were planning to do it we would have asked them not to.

"We can only apologise on their behalf for any offence caused. We do not think they realised that the service was taking place."

Read more: 

A spokesman for Leave.EU said: "It was nothing to do with us. We genuinely know nothing about a leave plane or a Vote Leave plane".

Britten-Norman has flown the banner over several UK cities, boasting about it on Twitter, because the firm's chief executive William Hynett backs Brexit.

A spokesman said tonight: "We understand that, during a pre planned photo opportunity over Westminster today, we were visible from Trafalgar Square and that our flight coincided with an important memorial service.

"The timing of our flight was determined by weather, air traffic control and the prior approval of the the Diplomatic Protection Group and required the consent of the Metropolitan Police.

"We are clearly very disappointed that the timing of the service and our flight have overlapped but there was no NOTAM (Notice to Airmen) requesting the avoidance and the coincidence of timing could not have been known by the crew flying the sortie.

"Our sincere apologies to anyone present who has been offended by the overflight. We would also like to take the opportunity to advise that the flight was a private one and was not sanctioned by the official Vote Leave campaign."

Brendan Cox's speech came just before a two-minute silence for his murdered wife.

His voice choked as he joined three-year-old daughter Lejla and five-year-old son Cuillin in a solemn vigil to the murdered MP.

And he inspired cheers as he said: "Jo's killing was political. It was an act of terror designed to advance an agenda of hatred towards others.

"What a beautiful irony it is that an act designed to advance hatred has instead generated such an outpouring of love."

He joked his wife was "not 5ft as widely reported" and a human being who missed trains due to caring for constituents and "went on a cycling holiday and forgot to pack her bike".

He added: "She just wanted people to be happy and for the world to be a fairer place. That's where her politics came from, not from the libraries of Cambridge or a narrow attachment to a theoretical ideology.

"Above all she was a mum. She was the best mum any could could wish for and wish we do, to have her back in our lives.

"Since Thursday Cuillin, Lejla and I have spoken every day about the things we will miss, the memories we will cherish.

"We try not to remember how cruelly she was taken from us but how unbelievably lucky we were to have her in our lives for so long.

Education campaigner Malala Yousafzai was due to be among the guest speakers at an hour-long rally in London's Trafalgar Square from 4pm.

Organisers said the events, being held in a variety of locations, were a tribute to Mrs Cox's "love, energy, passion, flair, Yorkshire heritage and belief in the humanity of every person in every place".

Actor Bill Nighy was due to perform a reading with a musical tribute from U2, recorded by the band in Los Angeles.

