David Cameron and Bank of England boss in furious war of words with Tory MPs over Brexit 'bias'

2016-06-16

 David Cameron and the governor of the Bank of England are exchanging a furious war of words with Tory MPs who accuse them of Brexit 'bias'. 

The bitter battle broke out this morning after George Osborne unveiled plans for an emergency NHS-slashing, tax-raising 'Brexit budget'.

65 Brexit-backing Tories have signed a pledge to vote against such a Budget - which Labour would vote down too.

And today 4 Tory big guns attacked the Treasury and Bank's 'ludicrous scaremongering born of desperation’ in a furious letter.

Ex-chancellors Lord Norman Lamont and Lord Nigel Lawson, and ex-party leaders Iain Duncan Smith and Lord Michael Howard, poured scorn on warnings of economic disaster from the Remain campaign.

Read more: 

They slammed the Treasury and the Bank of England for “peddling phoney forecasts” in a bid to scare voters into choosing to remain in the EU.

Writing in the Daily Telegraph they said: “There has been startling dishonesty in the economic debate, with a woeful failure on the part of the Bank of England, the Treasury and other official sources to present a fair and balanced analysis.

 “They have been peddling phoney forecasts and scare stories to back up the attempts of David Cameron and George Osborne to frighten the electorate into voting Remain.” 

That infuriated Prime Minister David Cameron - who said it is “deeply concerning” that senior Conservatives have criticised the “independent” Bank of England.

He added: “We should listen to experts when they warn us of the dangers to our economy of leaving the European Union.”

 At the same time the governor of the Bank of England slapped down a Tory MP who accused him of bias in the EU referendum . 

Mark Carney enraged Brexiters by saying a Leave vote was the ‘biggest domestic risk’ to the economy and drawing up emergency plans for June 24.

Tory MP Bernard Jenkin wrote to the financial chief warning he could have “disregarded Parliament’s wishes”.

Now Mr Carney has responded furiously and accused Mr Jenkin of “a fundamental misunderstanding of central bank independence”.

In a letter obtained by the BBC, he wrote he had not “made my views known” on the referendum.

He added: “Nor do I intend to share my private opinion other than via the anonymity of [the] ballot box when I join millions of others to cast my vote.

“All of the public comments that I, or other Bank officials, have made regarding issues related to the referendum have been limited to factors that affect the Bank’s statutory responsibilities and have been entirely consistent with our remits.”

He added the Bank has “a duty” to report its “evidence-based judgements” to the nation.

Mr Jenkin hit back, telling BBC Radio 4’s Today programme Mr Carney had “reacted very very aggressively” and gone “way beyond what a bank governor would normally do.”

He added: “He has to judge how political he wants his institution to be perceived as.”

