UK scientists react in HORROR to Brexit vote claiming we need to 'work together' to solve global challenges

2016-06-24

There has been a reaction of shock and concern from many Britain's scientists after the UK's unexpected decision to leave the EU.

Prior to the vote, many scientists had voiced their support for the Remain campaign, citing the importance of Britain working with scientists in Europe, and the ability to access EU funding.

Nobel laureate Sir Paul Nurse was one of 13 Nobel prize winning scientists who signed a letter backing the Remain campaign .

Speaking this morning he described the result as: "a poor outcome for British science" that will also be "bad for Britain".

The renowned geneticist said that "science thrives on the permeability of ideas and people, and flourishes in environments that pool intelligence, minimise barriers and are open to free exchange and collaboration."

Current president of the Royal society and Nobel prize winning structural biologist Prof. Venki Ramakrishnan added that: "many global challenges can only be tackled by countries working together".

"We need to continue to welcome researchers and students from abroad," he said.

Many scientists took to social media to express their sadness at the vote.

Fellow scientists in the EU tweeted their opinions, one emphasising that "collaboration not isolation!" was the way forward.

Speaking on Facebook, Jesus Vergara Temprado, a Spanish PhD student who is studying in the UK, said "the EU is good for science, it is really hard to find a single EU scientist saying the opposite".

He also raised the spectre of a coming "brain drain", saying that leaving the single market would cause science to "suffer", and that he "will probably look for better funding opportunities abroad".

Other younger UK scientists expressed their worries about the future of their careers. Dr Thomas Whale from the University of Leeds, said: "I'm just about to start a job funded by the [European Research Council] and I'm very worried about what's going to happen to that funding."

Early career scientist Dr Cat Scott, also at Leeds, said: " Brexit genuinely limits the future funding opportunities that will be available for us".

She also questioned whether the UK's environmental record will suffer: "I am concerned that without EU legislation the UK government's record on protecting the environment and improving air quality will get even worse."

