Vile Tory councillor suspended after vowing to 'donate the steam off my p*ss' in memory of Jo Cox

2016-06-21

A vile Tory councillor campaigning to leave the EU has been suspended after vowing to 'donate the steam off my p*ss" in memory of Jo Cox.

Shameful Tory Dominic Peacock, a member of the East Riding of Yorkshire Council, said he was "sick and tired" of hearing about the murder of Yorkshire MP Mrs Cox.

Over a link to a web page asking people to donate cash to charity in Jo's name, Coun Peacock wrote on Facebook: "I've just donated the steam off my p*ss!"

And when even fellow Leave campaigners recoiled in horror, he shot back: "I am sick and tired of this woman's death being used against the Brexit cause."

Friends and ex-colleagues of brave Mrs Cox, who was killed while campaigning to keep Britain in Europe, expressed shock and outrage at the slur.

Read more: 

Local Labour MP Karl Turner said: "I am in shock - this is absolutely disgusting.

"Jo was the most wonderful woman, a tiny woman but a giant in so many ways.

"For this Tory to write this just hours after we came together in Parliament to pay tributes yesterday, in what was the most emotional experience of my adult life - words cannot express how I feel.

"This man is elected to represent people. It is one of the most crass and abhorrent things I've ever seen."

Dragon's Den fitness tycoon Duncan Bannatyne said: "Councillor Dominic Peacock is a real piece of garbage."

Local Labour councillor Keith Moore, who sits across the benches from Coun Peacock, added:"I am absolutely stunned.

"I cannot believe any human being could post something like that about somebody who has been murdered in such tragic circumstances.

"She has left two children and a grieving husband - she hasn't even been buried yet.

"I'm sure his fellow Tory members will be equally horrified.

Council leader Stephen Parnaby said Coun Peacock has been suspended immediately and will be expelled from the Tory party tomorrow.

Coun Parnaby said: "Following inappropriate and offensive comments made on social media relating to the sad and tragic death of Jo Cox MP, I have suspended Coun Dominic Peacock from the East Riding of Yorkshire Council Conservative Group with immediate effect. I shall be reporting this to a meeting of the full Group and my recommendation will be that he be expelled.

"All people in public life, irrespective of politics should be united in condemning the fatal and dreadful attack on Jo Cox.

"This is not the time for inappropriate remarks, however intended, and I will not tolerate them in my Group, and residents should expect their elected representatives to act in an appropriate and compassionate way.

"I will also be asking the Group to make a contribution to the Memorial Fund set up in the name of Jo Cox."

The official Vote Leave campaign distanced themselves from Coun Peacock's vile comments.

Coun Peacock told local media he has "unreservedly apologised" and has no further comment to make.

