Dis-United Kingdom: How our vote for Brexit could lead to the end of Britain as we know it

2016-06-24

The victory for Brexit could spell the end of the United Kingdom as we know it.

Scotland voted overwhelmingly in favour of Remain, as did Northern Ireland and Gibraltar.

 The Scottish National Party ( SNP ) is already expected to call for another referendum on independence after voting to stay part of Britain in 2014. 

First Minister Nicola Sturgeon said Scotland had delivered a "strong, unequivocal vote" making clear that "the people of Scotland see their future as part of the European Union".

  READ MORE: 

Sixty-two per cent of Scots voted to Remain versus 47 per cent in England.

Similarly, 56 percent of Northern Irish voters sought to remain in the EU.

Sinn Fein's Martin McGuinness immediately called for a vote to unite the two sides of the Irish border.

 Ireland has the EU's fastest-growing economy but also more to lose than any other member state from Brexit with far-reaching implications for its trade, economy, security of energy supplies and peace in British-ruled Northern Ireland. 

 READ MORE: 

"The British government now has no democratic mandate to represent the views of the North in any future negotiations with the European Union and I do believe that there is a democratic imperative for a 'border poll' to be held," McGuinness told broadcaster RTE.

"The implications for all of us on the island of Ireland are absolutely massive."

"This could have very profound implications for our economy (in Northern Ireland)."

Even within England and Wales there was a clear divide among the electorate.

Voters in London were the most pro-Remain in the country, with three boroughs, Lambeth, Hackney and Haringey, polling more than 75 per cent to stay.

Other big cities including Leeds, Manchester, Liverpool and Cardiff all voted in favour of Remain.

And the Spanish government has called for 'the Spanish flag on Gibraltar' after Britain decided to quit the European Union.

Despite Britain's decision to leave - Gibraltar voted overwhelmingly to Remain, with 95.9 per cent of voters backing the Remain campaign.

The British Overseas Territory at the entrance to the Mediterranean relies heavily on its open border with Spain for trade.

Acting Spanish foreign minister Jose Manuel Garcia-Margallo said he hoped "co-sovereignty" of Gibraltar and "the Spanish flag on the Rock" were much closer to happening in the wake of the vote.

Professor Colin Talbot from the University of Manchester says the result will ultimately lead to the break-up of the UK.

 He said: "The SNP will almost certainly call another referendum. 

"Technically it is the London government that will call a referendum, but there would be riots in the streets of Scotland if they were denied a new referendum.

"I think Scotland will be out of the UK before Britain leaves the EU."

