What the Brexit vote means for Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland

2016-06-24

What have they done?

That was the overwhelming feeling on Friday as a shocked Scotland woke up to the news voters in England are to wrench them out of the European Union.

 When Scots can’t even be bothered celebrating David Cameron resigning, you know something has gone terribly wrong. 

And it wasn’t just the stock market crash, the run on the pound and the months and years of political chaos stretching out ahead that was causing dismay.

It was the complete sense of bewilderment about why it had happened.

Every single council area in Scotland voted to stay the EU. Overall, 62% of the ballot papers were marked in favour of Remain.

Scotland and England have never felt politically further apart.

 Viewed from north of the border, much of the Brexit debate has appeared beamed in from another universe. 

It was dominated by a Tory civil war and obsessed with an issue - immigration - that nobody really cares too much about here.

The upshot is that another referendum on Scottish independence is almost inevitable. And the smart money is on it returning a Yes vote this time around.

After all, Cameron previously insisted that only by staying part of Britain could Scotland guarantee its place in the EU. It’s an argument that has come back to bite unionists on the behind.

Many of those who voted to stay in the UK two years ago did so because they wanted to reject a narrow nationalism and its insular view of the world.

Friday’s result has recast independence as the positive, outward-looking option for Scotland.

There is only one winner in a contest between Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon’s civic and progressive nationalism and Nigel Farage’s foreigner-bashing.

Sturgeon’s speech from her official residence Bute House in Edinburgh captured the mood.

“I am proud of Scotland and how we voted yesterday,” she said.

“We proved that we are a modern, outward-looking, open and inclusive country, and we said clearly that we do not want to leave the European Union. I am determined that we will do what it takes to make sure that these aspirations are realised.”

 Watching David Cameron ’s Downing Street resignation, it felt like he was talking from amongst the rubble of the British state. 

In their desire to “take back control” of Britain, the Brexiteers may have succeeded where Hitler failed and destroyed it.

 The Brexit result is a double-nightmare for Welsh activists who spent recent fighting for an In vote. 

There had always been the fear that Wales could be dragged out of the EU against its will if millions of English voters backed the Out campaign.

But something even more soul-crushing has happened. A thumping majority of people in Wales have voted to leave – 53.4%.

 The myth of a pro-EU Wales is now dead. In former industrial heartlands across the country people rejected a future in the EU and were won over to Brexit . 

This shattering result comes on the heels of last month’s election when Ukip rocked the political establishment by winning seven of the 60 seats in the Assembly.

Welsh Labour politicians are fiercely proud of Wales’ radical past but they will be worried about what the future holds outside the EU.

A major report by Cardiff University’s Wales Governance Centre this year found that Wales receives £245m more from the EU than it pays in – the equivalent of £79 a head. Wales has received around £4bn in EU funding since 2000.

Vote Leave pledged during the campaign that regions will still get the cash they would have received from the EU – and Welsh Labour leader Carwyn Jones, the nation’s First Minister, intends to hold them to it.

 Within hours of the Brexit result being announced he called for “the promise made that Wales will not lose a penny to be guaranteed”. 

The Bridgend AM admitted he was “deeply disappointed” by the result.

Of Wales 22 local authorities, just five had a majority wanting to stay in the EU.

There is nothing like the level of support for independence seen in Scotland in Wales, but both Labour and Plaid Cymru will be pushing for major changes to the nation’s place in the UK.

A priority for Mr Jones is a new funding settlement. He argues there is an “overwhelming case” for a “major and immediate revision” of the formula used to allocate Treasury cash to the Welsh Government.

Banging the drum for change, he said: “The relationship between devolved administrations and the UK Government must now be placed onto an entirely different footing.”

Plaid Cymru’s Leanne Wood is adamant the “UK cannot continue in its current form”.

She said: “Wales, its economy and its communities will soon be at the full mercy of the Westminster elite and robust action must be taken to mitigate the impact of this.”

There are big questions about what will happen to the crisis-hit Welsh steel industry now that the UK faces a future outside the single market.

Margaret Thomas, the regional secretary of Unison Cymru, had simple advice for workers across Wales.

She said it is now “essential” to join a trade union.

Northern Ireland woke up with an almighty headache on Friday - but it had nothing to do with celebrating football hopes in the Euros.

Instead, the population of 1.8 million kicked off the duvet to discover they are now to be dragged out of Europe against the wishes of the voting majority.

A total of 440,707 people placed a firm X on a voting card to remain within the European Union, and 349,442 made their mark to leave.

But just like Scotland, democracy dealt Ulster a slap in the face leaving the 56% majority vote meaningless over the 44% who demanded to opt out.

The situation throws up unique problems for Northern Ireland, from the billions of so-called European peace money to European Court of Human rights, the last bastion of hope for many throughout the Troubles.

Of Northern Ireland’s 18 constituencies, 11 voted Remain and seven voted Leave with clear division between nationalists and unionists.

In a bizarre twist, Arlene Foster, the country’s First Minister, leader of the DUP, and ultra pro-unionist, pushed against the British establishment and demanded a road out of Europe.

 While Martin McGuinness, Deputy First Minister, Sinn Fein’s chief negotiator, and fierce pro-nationalist, pushed to help Prime Minister David Cameron keep his feet on European soil. 

A cool Mrs Foster said: “We are now entering a new era of an even stronger United Kingdom. I am very much looking forward to working with our colleagues in our national government to build a very strong, outward-looking UK moving forward and of course Northern Ireland as a very key constituent part of that.”

But red-faced and furious Mr McGuinness demanded a border vote in a bid to establish an all Ireland, saying: “We are unchartered waters. This decision to drag us out of the European Union against our democratically expressed wishes has nothing to do with issues around the European institutions and everything to do with the civil war within the British Tory party.”

Secretary of State Theresa Villiers can only call a border poll if there is clear evidence of a public opinion swing towards Irish unity. But the test for a border vote has not been met and it’s unlikely to happen.

The UK first applied to join the European Union in 1961 as social disquiet was gaining momentum in Northern Ireland.

By 1973 when Tory Prime Minister Edward Heath took Britain into Europe, Northern Ireland was in the bloody mess of The Troubles with 725 people already murdered by bullet, bomb or brutal beating.

Over the years membership of the European Union offered the country a salve for many injuries inflicted upon its citizens.

And in the last 21 years, Northern Ireland has benefited from three peace programmes and whopping financial contribution of EUR 1.3 billion.

The value of the PEACE IV programme is EUR 270 million with the ERDF contribution to the Programme sitting at around 85% or EUR 229.

Now that money will dry up.

 Brexit will catapult Northern Ireland into a situation of: 

 *Political crisis: Brexit will reinforce the division of the island. The 1998 Belfast Agreement itself was premised on both UK and Irish membership of the European Union. 

 *Business: Around 55% of Northern Ireland’s manufacturing goes to the EU, most of this to the Irish Republic but Brexit risks leaving the UK without access to the single market. The NI Assembly’s Enterprise Committee reported the local economy would lose EURO1 billion every year following a Brexit and face a 3% slump in GDP. 

*Farming: The EU’s Common Agricultural Policy accounts for nearly 85% of farm income across Northern Ireland and the aid figure until 2020 is estimated at around €3billion.

*Universities and research: Funding of world class research will be under threat.

But the most profound issue for Northern Ireland, which represents just 1.5 per cent of the UK’s citizens, will be the 310-mile border.

For the last 20 years and throughout the fragile and often stuttering peace process, the border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland has become progressively less important, but now it will be catapulted back into sharp and uncomfortable focus.

Stretching Derry to Warrenpoint, it will be the only part of the United Kingdom to share a land border with another EU member state.

And this new international border will bring with it the potential imposition of passport, customs and military checks.

