Our employees paid price of EU dream, admits Red Len: Union boss declares enlargement was 'gigantic experiment at the expense' of British workers

2016-6-21

Union baron Len McCluskey last night declared that the enlargement of the EU into Eastern Europe had been a ‘gigantic experiment’ conducted ‘at the expense’ of British workers.

The leader of the country’s biggest union – supposed to be campaigning to stay inside the EU – said it had led to ‘sustained pressure on living standards, a systematic attempt to hold down wages and to cut the costs of social provision for working people’.

His intervention came amid the publication of a report claiming that unskilled EU migrants cost each British family more than £200 a year.

Union baron Len McCluskey, pictured, who last night declared that the enlargement of the EU into Eastern Europe had been a ‘gigantic experiment’ conducted ‘at the expense’ of British workers

Benefit handouts, the cost of education and healthcare bills bump up the amount paid by taxpayers to almost £6.6billion a year, the report said.

Mr McCluskey – known as Red Len – delivered a devastating verdict on the decision to allow workers from Eastern Europe into the EU from 2004.

If Britain votes to stay inside the EU, the free movement of workers will continue unchecked. Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, an ally of Mr McCluskey, has said this makes it impossible to put an upper limit on immigration.

Writing in the Guardian, Mr McCluskey said: ‘In the last ten years, there has been a gigantic experiment at the expense of ordinary workers. Countries with vast historical differences in wage rates and living standards have been brought together in a common labour market.

Jeremy Corbyn admitting he is not a lover of the EU during a Sky News debate

Jeremy Corbyn last night admitted he was ‘not a lover of the EU’ as he struggled to explain why Britain should vote Remain.

In a question-and-answer session on Sky News, the Labour leader, left, also praised Germany’s open-door policy for migrants and refugees, which Angela Merkel has had to abandon.

Lifelong Eurosceptic Mr Corbyn, who is backing Remain following Shadow Cabinet pressure, said he fully supported the EU’s principle of free movement, which is blamed for driving many Labour voters to back Brexit.

But he hit out at EU policies on trade, competition and austerity, saying he was ‘not unconditional about Europe by any means’.

Mr Corbyn also criticised ‘catastrophist’ warnings from the In campaign, and said he was backing Remain in the hope that the European Union would change and strengthen workers’ rights.

He said: ‘I’m not a lover of the European Union, I think it’s a rational decision, we should stay in order to try and improve.’

And Mr Corbyn, whose lack of enthusiasm for the EU has angered party colleagues, said he would not be held responsible for a Brexit vote. ‘I’m not going to take blame for people’s decisions,’ he said.

‘The result has been sustained pressure on living standards, a systematic attempt to hold down wages and to cut costs of social provision for working people.’

His comments will heighten fears that working-class Labour supporters will fail to turn out on Thursday – or vote for Leave.

However, Mr McCluskey said he did not agree that leaving the EU would halt ‘the supply of cheap labour coming to Britain’.

The group of eight independent leading economists published the paper as the EU referendum campaign entered its final days. It says the influx from Eastern Europe and elsewhere into low-skilled jobs has led to a heavier burden on communities.

The organisation also cites a paper published by the Bank of England which found mass migration had driven down wages of millions of Britons. But it said that skilled migrants offered a ‘huge economic boost’.

Economists For Brexit analysed the total taxation contribution of the 1.2million EU migrants in the UK considered unskilled and compared it with the cost in welfare payments and use of the NHS and education. 

It calculated that a family of four EU migrants, with two children at primary school and a stay-at-home mother, would pay £1,271 in tax and national insurance a year, but cost £30,496 in handouts, schools and healthcare – a net cost of £29,225.

Meanwhile, a single EU foreigner would rake in £2,120 a year in benefits but pay out £1,271 – a net cost of £849 per annum.

The think-tank, assisted by former University of Liverpool tax and benefits expert Paul Ashton, calculated single people would make up 28 per cent of the 1.2million unskilled migrants.

This gave the cost of single migrants as £288.6million, while for families it was £6.28billion – a total of almost £6.6billion. The cost to the taxpayer was £17.75 a month for each worker, or £213 a year. Patrick Minford, co-chairman of the think-tank and a professor of economics at Cardiff University, said: ‘Skilled migrants offer a huge economic boost to the UK... 

'However, it is clear that the UK is suffering in economic terms significantly from vast numbers of unskilled EU migrants. Leaving the EU and the single market is the only way for the UK to take back control.’

But Labour former shadow chancellor Chris Leslie said experts ‘all now agree that leaving would damage the UK economy.’

Meanwhile, former Tory Treasury minister Peter Lilley has attacked George Osborne’s analysis that the cost of leaving the EU would devastate British trade – calling it ‘indefensible statistical manipulation’.

Schools bulging at seams squeeze in extra classes to cop with influx

By Sarah Harris

Leave campaigner Priti Patel says the pressure on schools shows how uncontrolled immigration is affecting public services

Tens of thousands of pupils are being squeezed into extra primary school classes amid high migration and a baby boom.

Schools are being forced to provide ‘bulge’ classes or permanently increase intakes due to the unprecedented pressure on places.

Data issued under freedom of information laws shows that in 47 English council areas, more than 732 primary schools have added an extra or bulge class in the past five years.

These one-off classes equate to an extra 21,960 pupils on school rolls. They usually start in reception and continue through the years until the pupils reach secondary age.

Another 418 primary schools have permanently increased their admission total to add one or more additional forms.

If the pattern is repeated across England, it would mean a total of 2,432 bulge classes, cramming more than 72,960 extra pupils into schools. It would also equate to 1,368 primaries being forced to permanently add forms.

The problem has become a battleground in the EU referendum debate. Leave campaigners argue that the increased demand is fuelled by immigration and will only get worse if the UK votes to remain.

The FOI figures show most bulge classes and expansions are focused in areas with high migration, including London, the South East and East of England, and the Midlands.

In Essex, 86 primaries have bulge classes while Kent has 57. In Hounslow, West London, 30 schools have taken at least one new class and 24 have permanently expanded. Barnet, North London, has 51 bulge classes and Bromley, South London, has 22. In Derbyshire, 43 primaries have new classes and Lincolnshire schools have squeezed in 30.

Some have doubled in size. Maney Hill in Birmingham, Mellers Primary in Nottingham, and Hogarth Primary in Brentford, West London, will go from 210-pupil primaries to 420.

Leave campaigner and Tory MP Priti Patel said: ‘The shortage of places is another example of how uncontrolled migration is putting unsustainable pressures on public services.’

Schools minister Nick Gibb warned against a Leave vote, saying: ‘By building a stronger economy, we will deliver 600,000 more places over the next five years.’

 

