Don't give Boris a top Cabinet job! Cameron warned by allies to punish 'disloyal' Brexit ministers over 'toxic' campaign if Britain stays in the EU on Thursday

2016-6-20

David Cameron has been told by allies not to hand Boris Johnson a Cabinet job if Britain votes to stay in the EU on Thursday, it emerged today. 

Pro-EU ministers and MPs want him to scrap plans for a 'unity reshuffle,' insisting Brexit ministers and MPs had been disloyal by campaigning so vociferously the Prime Minister.

Employment minister Priti Patel has been one of the most aggressive Out campaigners who have attacked government policy despite being a Cabinet minister herself, but Justice Secretary Michael Gove - a close friend of Mr Cameron - has not held back from criticising the Government's record.  

Who's in the driving seat? Boris is shown how to control a digger at Tippers R Us in Ipswich today as his Brexit campaign continues. David Cameron has been told by allies not to hand the former London Mayor a Cabinet job if Britain votes to stay in the EU

Mr Johnson was tipped to be given a top job in government as a gesture to the Leave camp of the Tory party and an attempt to put the bitter infighting within the party to bed.

A minister campaigning for a Remain vote on Thursday told the Daily Telegraph: 'People who backed the Prime Minister and made the case for the EU would be outraged to see people who attacked the Government getting promoted.'

But failure to promote pro-Brexit Tory MPs risks causing a long-lasting rift in the party over Europe. 

Mr Gove is expected to keep his role in Cabinet, but other pro-Brexit Cabinet ministers are expected to be demoted in favour of younger, more loyal MPs. 



Chris Grayling, Leader of the House of Commons, Culture Secretary John Whittingdale and Northern Ireland Secretary Theresa Villiers could lose their jobs along with Ms Patel. 

Vote Leave campaigner Liam Fox, the former defence secretary, could return to Cabinet if Mr Cameron decides in favour of a unity reshuffle. 

Which way's the Brexit? Boris looks confused at the helm of a truck during today's referendum campaign. Britain goes to the polls on Thursday

However some within the party believe Mr Cameron will wait until the autumn to reshuffle his top team in order to calm tensions in the party after months of blue-on-blue civil war, which has dominated newspaper headlines and some fear done permanent damage the party's image. 





Mr Johnson's focus today was on urging voters to back his cause for leaving the EU, using his weekly newspaper column to warn people they have one chance to 'change the whole course of European history' by backing Brexit on Thursday.

As the long-awaited referendum moves into its final hours and with the polls finely balanced, the Vote Leave champion said voters had a 'fundamental decision' to make.

Mr Johnson said the Remain campaign was offering 'nothing... but the steady and miserable erosion of Parliamentary democracy' in Britain.

Mr Cameron last night made his final pitch to voters in a live BBC Question Time special, insisting a strong economy underpinned everything else - but he was lashed again and again over immigration. 



Referendum campaigning will again be muted today as MPs gather in Westminster to pay tribute to Jo Cox at an emergency recall of the House of Commons in the wake of her killing.

Pro-EU ministers and MPs want David Cameron (pictured during the Question Time debate last night) to scrap plans for a 'unity reshuffle,' insisting Brexit ministers and MPs had been disloyal by campaigning so vociferously the Prime Minister

A final push will begin tomorrow night when Mr Johnson takes part in the biggest live TV debate of the campaign at Wembley Arena.

In his final newspaper column before the vote, the ex-Mayor of London wrote in the Daily Telegraph: 'When you pick up your ballot paper this Thursday, you have it in your hands to transform Britain's current democratic arrangements for the better.

'You can change the whole course of European history – and if you vote Leave, I believe that change will be overwhelmingly positive.

'If we vote Remain, we stay locked in the back of the car, driven by someone with an imperfect command of English, and going a direction we don't want to go.' 

Employment minister Priti Patel (pictured) has been one of the most aggressive Out campaigners who have attacked government policy despite being a Cabinet minister herself, but Justice Secretary Michael Gove - a close friend of Mr Cameron - has not held back from criticising the Government's record

Mr Johnson said a Remain vote would do nothing to 'rebuke the elites in Brussels' or allow Britain to set up a trade deal with America, China or India.

And in a clear dismissal of Mr Cameron - who just last night insisted Britain was better in the room, at the negotiating table, Mr Johnson said: 'We are not more powerful, or more influential for being around the table in Brussels.

'Look at the pitiful results of the so-called renegotiation earlier this year. We are drowned out.

'And it is an illusion to think that if we vote to Remain, we are somehow opting for the status quo.

'The status quo is not on offer. If we stay in, we will be engaged willy-nilly in the desperate attempt to keep the euro together, by building an economic government of Europe.' 





Mr Johnson said he wanted to hand 'power back to the people' because democracy was the 'best way of correcting the errors of our people'.

He said: 'Now is the time to believe in ourselves, and in what Britain can do, and to remember that we always do best when we believe in ourselves.

'Of course we can continue to provide leadership and support for Europe – but inter-governmentally, outside the supranational EU system.

'I hope you will vote Leave, and take back control of this great country's destiny; and if we Vote Leave, then all our votes will count for more in the future.

'This chance will not come again in our lifetimes, and I pray we do not miss it.'

Mr Johnson will again be joined by Labour's Gisela Stuart and Tory Andrea Leadsom when he takes to the Wembley Arena stage tomorrow night.

For the Remain side, Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson, Mayor of London Sadiq Khan and TUC chief Frances O'Grady. 



Tory peer Baroness Warsi claimed to have switched to the Remain camp

Maverick Tory peer Baroness Warsi last night claimed to have switched to the Remain camp in protest over a controversial Nigel Farage immigration poster.

However, her high-profile 'defection' was greeted with bafflement among Leave supporters - who could not remember her ever campaigning in their side.

Lady Warsi's claims were made following a day when a Ukip poster claiming migration was pushing the continent to 'breaking point' were condemned by all sides.

Last night she told The Times: 'That breaking point poster really was - for me - the breaking point to say: 'I can't go on supporting this'.

She added: 'We all feel very passionately about these issues, it's when you start to believe that any means are acceptable to achieve an end. It's not an easy decision.

'When I look at the people who are now saying the things they are saying and the people who are supporting that approach, the BNP, Donald Trump, Marine le Pen, Austria's Freedom Party — every day it feels like the far right is coming out to stand by Leave.' 

She later told the BBC: 'This kind of nudge-nudge, wink-wink xenophobic racist campaign may be politically savvy or politically useful in the short term, but it causes long-term damage to communities.

'The vision that me and other Brexiters who have been involved right from the outset, who had a positive outward-looking vision of what a Brexit vote might mean, unfortunately those voices have now been stifled.

'What we see is the divisive campaign which has resulted in people like me and others who are deeply Eurosceptic and want to see a reformed relationship feel that they now have to leave Leave.'

But a spokesman for Vote Leave said the campaign was confused by Lady Warsi's announcement.

Controversial: Nigel Farage unveils the pro-Brexit poster that shows a crowd of refugees and says that the UK is at 'breaking point'

Chancellor George Osborne led attacks on the poster, which he likened to Nazi propaganda 

He said: 'We don't remember Warsi ever joining our campaign so we are puzzled by her claims to have defected.'

Daniel Hannan, the high profile Tory MEP and Leave campaigner, said: 'When I invited Sayeeda Warsi to join the Leave campaign, she declined. Fair enough, obviously. But how is this a 'defection'?'



Tory MP Bernard Jenkin added: 'I helped set up Vote Leave and she has not been at a single meeting I have attended. ''Defects'' just not accurate!.' 

Lady Warsi, who was dumped from the Cabinet by the PM in 2012, has a record of picking high-profile rows.

She was last seen hammering the Tories and Number Ten over the controversial London mayoralty campaign - in which Labour's Sadiq Khan was linked to Islamist extremists by David Cameron.

In May, she Tweeted: 'Our appalling dog whistle campaign for #LondonMayor2016 lost us the election, our reputation & credibility on issues of race and religion.'

Yesterday Chancellor George Osborne led attacks on the poster, which he likened to Nazi propaganda. 

On ITV's Peston on Sunday, the Chancellor accused Mr Farage of 'whipping up division'.

He said that, in the wake of the murder of Labour MP Jo Cox, 'we need to have a less divisive political debate in our country' with 'less baseless assertion and inflammatory rhetoric'.

Mr Osborne added: 'That disgusting and vile poster that Nigel Farage did which had echoes of literature used in the 1930s. 

'That is what we should say no to and this referendum vote is a vote on the kind of Britain we want.'

Speaking to the BBC's Andrew Marr programme, Michael Gove, who is leading the Vote Leave campaign, distanced himself from Mr Farage, as did key Leave supporters including Leader of the Commons Chris Grayling.

Justice Secretary Mr Gove said: 'When I saw that poster, I shuddered. I thought it was the wrong thing to do.'

But, defending the poster, Mr Farage said that it 'reflects the truth of what's going on'. He said he thought Mrs Cox's death – hours after the poster was unveiled on Thursday – had heightened criticism, telling Sky News: 'I wish an innocent MP had not been gunned down in the street.

'Frankly had that not happened I don't think we would have had the kind of row over it.'

On Question Time last night, Mr Cameron said that the poster was 'wrong in fact' as it showed Syrian refugees who were not headed to Britain.

The Prime Minister said: 'I think that poster was irresponsible, and there is an attempt to scare people.'





