Please don't go! Europe's top bureaucrat pleads with Britons to 'stay with us' on Thursday, admitting the EU needs Britain 

2016-6-20

Donald Tusk today issued a direct appeal to Britain not to vote for Brexit on Thursday, urging voters to 'stay with us'.

The European Council president made the last ditch plea with just three days until the United Kingdom votes on whether to Leave or Remain a member of the European Union.

Brussels had largely stayed out of the referendum battle until polls suggested Britain could vote for Brexit on Thursday - prompting Mr Tusk to issue a dire warning about the collapse of 'western political civilisation'. 

EU Council president Donald Tusk, pictured in Brussels with David Cameron, admitted today the EU needed Britain as he urged voters to back the 28-member club in Thursday's referendum 

Mr Cameron, pictured at the Mini factory in Cowley today, will hope Mr Tusk's message hits home with voters before they fill out their ballots on Thursday 

Mr Tusk, who is responsible for running the council meetings attended by heads of state and government, today struck a more conciliatory tone.

He said: 'I would like to appeal to the British citizens, on behalf, I know that for a fact, of almost all Europeans and European leaders: Stay with us.

'Without you, not only Europe, but the whole Western community will become weaker. Together, we will be able to cope with increasingly difficult challenges of the future.'

He added: 'In no way are we downplaying the economic costs that would accompany Brexit ... I have no doubt, however, that we are already prepared for the day after the referendum.' 



Mr Tusk acknowledged the EU would need to be reformed regardless of the result on Thursday because of growing Euroscepticism across the continent.

He said: 'We would be foolish if we ignored such a warning signal as the UK referendum.

'There are more signals of dissatisfaction with the Union coming from all of Europe, not only from the UK.'

Donald Tusk today also issued a warning on Twitter and called on British voters to 'stay with us' when the country votes on June 23 

Last week, in apocalyptic comments in an interview with German newspaper Bild, Mr Tusk said 'no-one could forsee' the consequences of Brexit.

'Why is it so dangerous? Because no one can foresee what the long-term consequences would be,' Mr Tusk said.

'As a historian I fear that Brexit could be the beginning of the destruction of not only the EU but also of western political civilisation in its entirety.'

He argued that everyone in the European Union would lose out economically if Britain left.

'Every family knows that a divorce is traumatic for everyone,' Mr Tusk said.

'Everyone in the EU, but especially the Brits themselves, would lose out economically.' 





