Bienvenue à Londres: That's what Boris always said to French, reveals his former mayoral adviser GUTO HARRI. So why on earth has he changed his EU tune?

2016-6-19

I count myself as one of Boris Johnson’s greatest admirers.

I watched him closely as his spokesman and director of communications in his first four years at City Hall. My office was next to his. 

My wife moaned that there were three people in our marriage, ‘and the blonde always seems to come ahead of me!’

When Francois Hollande promised punitive taxes on high earners in Paris, Boris issued an open invitation to them, declaring: ‘Bienvenue à Londres.’ Many took up the invitation and are still here, paying UK taxes

I’ve seen how his magic touch resonates as powerfully in Chelsea as in the East End. I’ve been handed thousands of smartphones to snap Boris selfies for the fans.

He travelled everywhere without a driver or security. No one ever hurt Boris, but he was often greeted with a heartfelt ‘Tory Tosser’, a badge of honour as he saw it.

As we cycled to Westminster together one day, we happened to pull up at traffic lights next to David Cameron’s limo. ‘Aren’t you the Mayor of London?’, shouted another cyclist. ‘Yes, I guess I am.’

Then he spotted the face in the car.’ Isn’t he the leader of the Opposition?’ ‘Yes’, says Boris, ‘we’re the outriders!’ It was less amusing when staff rang to say they had caught a man trying to smuggle a gun in to attack the Mayor. Fortunately, he was apprehended.

What happened to Jo Cox was tragic. Politics, if it is worth doing, involves taking a stand that some will disagree with, and the tributes to the MP from across the divide remind us of the universal respect for those who champion a worthy cause and speak plainly.

So I respect my former boss for taking sides in the referendum debate. Sadly – in my view – he picked the wrong side. 

How can this Brussels-educated, multilingual, half-Turkish, quarter-French, Catholic-christened former Mayor even contemplate London, let alone Britain, leaving the EU, asks Guto Harri

On the day reporters were camped outside his house waiting to discover whether he would back Leave or Remain, I was trying to talk him back from the brink, arguing that Brexit would cast the UK adrift. I failed.

The reason I struggle to understand his decision is because of my experience of working alongside him. 

As Mayor, Boris was a passionate champion for London. He’s always hated those who ‘talk London down,’ and once frustrated US TV interviewer Katie Couric by being too positive about London during the worst days of the financial crisis. 

Stopping the interview, she told him: ‘You’re coming across as a recession-denier.’ ‘That’s my job,’ he said. ‘Start the camera again.’ 

Those were the days when he took the courageous and counter-intuitive decision to support the financial sector at a time when most of the world wanted to string up bankers.

Guto Harri (above): 'I respect my former boss for taking sides in the referendum debate. Sadly – in my view – he picked the wrong side'

I heard him describe bankers in terms that would make many blush. But he was also clear about their contribution to the capital. 

Behind every top finance chief is a food chain that stretches from the corporate lawyer, accountant and PR to the driver, shop assistant, sous chef and nanny, he would argue – as well as a stripper, he would occasionally add.

I was there when Boris argued for a fall in the top rate of tax so London would not lose its competitive advantage over fierce rivals for flows of capital and high net-worth individuals.

When Francois Hollande promised punitive taxes on high earners in Paris, Boris issued an open invitation to them, declaring: ‘Bienvenue à Londres.’ Many took up the invitation and are still here, paying UK taxes.

And I helped him lobby the EU to modify proposals for an Alternative Investment Directive that would have undermined the City he was so determined to protect. 

The directive was modified, London pulled through the recession and the mass hysteria against bankers burnt itself out.

Yet now Boris would cut London adrift from the EU. Short of a devastating terrorist attack, I cannot imagine any action more damaging to the City of London than Brexit. As a distinguished historian he understands the wider context of the referendum debate. 

His book, The Dream Of Rome, explored how the Romans achieved political and cultural unity in Europe. 

His biography of Churchill reflects on his post-war vision of peace between warring nations. And his Life Of London champions the enormous benefits to the capital of centuries of immigration.

As Mayor, he opposed David Cameron’s immigration cap, advocated an amnesty for illegal immigrants, held citizenship ceremonies at City Hall and boasted how every visiting athlete would play to a home crowd at the London Olympics.

For all its flaws, the EU has anchored Europe in democratic government and given us access to a market of 500 million on our doorstep. 

Just five years ago Boris wrote a newspaper article advocating an EU Services directive which, as he put it, ‘would allow everyone from opticians to estate agents to insurance brokers to set up more freely in other European jurisdictions’.

The ultimate test – as he saw it – was to produce a common standard for electric plugs – a ‘Europlug’, he called it. ‘Now is the time to set out a positive vision for a Europe that actually helps individuals and businesses,’ he wrote.

Which is why I struggle to comprehend how this Brussels-educated, multilingual, half-Turkish, quarter-French, Catholic-christened former Mayor can even contemplate London, let alone Britain, leaving the EU.

