SamCam's tears as her husband resigns: The extraordinary moment David Cameron quits after humbling EU referendum defeat ends his six years in Downing Street

2016-6-24

David Cameron almost broke down and his wife Samantha wiped away tears as he fell on his sword after his devastating referendum defeat.

The Prime Minister looked tired and grey as he walked out of No 10 at 8.23am as it became clear his exit was now inevitable.

His great gamble on a referendum on European Union membership had not paid off and he acknowledged that 'fresh leadership' was required.

Flanked by his wife his voice cracked with emotion as he announced his decision to step down as Prime Minister outside 10 Downing Street. 

Afterwards he grabbed Samantha's hand and refused to stop for questions as he filed back through the famous black door. 

Scroll down for video 

Emotional: Mrs Cameron clearly had tears in her eyes as her husband resigned - Mr Cameron himself struggled to get through his speech

Embrace: After the Prime Minister said that the UK needed a new leader he clasped hands with his wife - who was too emotional to return his smile

The end: David Cameron announces he is quitting as Prime Minister as Samantha Cameron wipes her eyes after his devastating referendum defeat

Tender: Mr and Mrs Cameron, who have lived in No 10 for six years, held hands as they left the door this morning and then the Tory leader put his arm round his wife as they walked away


                        
                    


                        
                            
                        
                    

Preen by Thornton Bregazzi Resort 2015

Shop the current collection at Net-a-Porter


                            Visit site
                        

Samantha Cameron has been known to wear designer labels like Christopher Kane, Roksanda Ilincic, Mary Katrantzou, Victoria Beckham, Peter Pilotto and Erdem, but Preen by Thornton Bregazzi is clearly a favourite.

Today she picked an elegant piece from the Resort 2015 line, and it's not the only dress in her wardrobe from the collection. It features the multicoloured grid print that was a running theme throughout and it's a statement look that is typical of her style.

Husband and wife duo Justin Thornton and Thea Bregazzi set up shop in 1996 and since then they have found famous fans in everyone from Michelle Obama to Blake Lively and Alexa Chung. Unfortunately Samantha's exact dress is no longer available to buy, but click (right) to shop the current collection at Net-a-Porter.  

Or style one of the colour block dresses we've found for you on the virtual high street with simple court heels and a black belt to accentuate your waist.

Maiocci ollection Colour Blocked Dress at House of Fraser (reduced to £95.40)


                                            Visit site
                                        

The Collection Red colour block fitted dress at Debenhams


                                            Visit site
                                        

Phase Eight Costa Rica printed dress (reduced to £26.50)


                                            Visit site
                                        

Linea Sophia Linen Colourblock Dress at House of Fraser (reduced to £48.30)


                                            Visit site
                                        

Boohoo Emily colour block shift dress


                                            Visit site
                                        

Oasis colourblock scoop pleat midi dress


                                            Visit site
                                        

There were some gasps among the world's press, who had been gathering in Downing Street since dawn to hear how Mr Cameron would respond to the humiliation of defeat.

But there were also some cheers outside Downing Street as Brexit supporters waving Union Flags heard news that Mr Cameron would step down. 

The delivery of newspapers shortly after 6am would not have improved the mood behind the famous black door of Number 10, with headlines foreshadowing what would soon become official - the British people had voted to Leave.

There had been frenzied speculation among the waiting press about what exactly Mr Cameron would do - would he vow to fight on, despite the blow to his authority? Would he quit immediately?

A correspondent for French broadcaster iTele repeatedly told her viewers that Mr Cameron was 'fini', while British reporters monitored the opening of the FTSE, tracking the numbers rising next to the red downward arrow as markets responded to the referendum result.

Overhead, TV helicopters hovered over Westminster while two Union Flags hung limply over the roofs of 10 and 11 Downing Street. 

It had been expected that Mr Cameron would respond to the result before 8am - when the stock markets opened. 

Egoin installs 'collective custom build' property in Edinburgh

Cruel moment man dumps his dog at the roadside before driving off

Police chief speculates there may not have been a drone at all

Teenage Meghan put on scene-stealing performance at Christmas show

Bye Felicia! Hair-larious argument over bus seating arrangements

Chris Evans thanks fans after final BBC Radio 2 breakfast show

Witness recalls moment teenage driver ran down man lying on road

Horrifying CCTV shows hit and run driver plough into young men

Hundreds of people flee amid fears 34-storey building will collapse

Shocking moment out-of-control snow plough hits woman in Russia

Last minute Christmas shoppers queue to park outside supermarket

Dramatic aerial footage of the Krakatoa eruption in Indonesia

8.23am: Mr Cameron emerges from No 10 with his wife. There were rumours he would speak as early as 7am, which led to speculation that his tenure as PM was coming to an end

Brave face: Mr Cameron looked tired as he held his wife;s hand as he took the walk to the podium in Downing Street

Solemn: Mrs Cameron was clearly upset at her husband's fate - but Mr Cameron said he was no longer the right man to lead the country

Speech: Mr Cameron, who will remain in post for a few months, said that he loved his country and would do his best to 'steady the ship'

Message: Mr Cameron spoke after the UK markets opened and said that they would take measures to make sure the economy was stablised

End of an era: Mr Cameron said he stood by his assertion that the UK could 'find a way' to survive outside the EU - his wife Samantha was clearly overwhelmed

Close: Mr Cameron ended his speech and then smiled at Samantha - Mrs Cameron was unable to do the same as she grabbed his hand

Leadership: Mr Cameron said he would be handing over to a new leader after he failed to lead the Remain campaign to victory

Warm: Mr Cameron put his arm around his wife's waist as they entered No 10 Downing Street after his shock resignation  

Instead, it was around 20 minutes later when Mr and Mrs Cameron walked into the street. The delay hinted that he was prepare to resign. 

With his wife standing nearby, Mr Cameron declared that he would not be able to 'captain' the ship of state into the uncharted waters of Brexit.

'The country requires fresh leadership to take it in this direction,' said Mr Cameron.

'I will do everything I can as Prime Minister to steady the ship over the coming weeks and months, but I don't think it would be right for me to try to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination.

'I love this country – and I feel honoured to have served it - but we should have a new Prime Minister': David Cameron's speech in full

The country has just taken part in a giant democratic exercise – perhaps the biggest in our history. Over 33 million people – from England, Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and Gibraltar – have all had their say.

We should be proud of the fact that in these islands we trust the people with these big decisions.

We not only have a parliamentary democracy, but on questions about the arrangements for how we are governed, there are times when it is right to ask the people themselves - and that is what we have done.

The British people have voted to leave the European Union and their will must be respected.

I want to thank everyone who took part in the campaign on my side of the argument, including all those who put aside party differences to speak in what they believed was the national interest.

And let me congratulate all those who took part in the leave campaign – for the spirited and passionate case that they made.

The will of the British people is an instruction that must be delivered. It was not a decision that was taken lightly, not least because so many things were said by so many different organisations about the significance of this decision.

Message: Mr Cameron said: 'We should be proud of the fact that in these islands we trust the people with these big decisions'

Huge crowds: The world's press gathered in Downing Street to hear the Prime Minister's speech, which turned out to be a resignation

So there can be no doubt about the result.

Across the world people have been watching the choice that Britain has made. I would reassure those markets and investors that Britain’s economy is fundamentally strong.

And I would also reassure Brits living in European countries and European citizens living here that there will be no immediate changes in your circumstances. There will be no initial change in the way our people can travel, in the way our goods can move or the way our services can be sold.

We must now prepare for a negotiation with the European Union. This will need to involve the full engagement of the Scottish, Welsh and Northern Ireland Governments, to ensure that the interests of all parts of our United Kingdom are protected and advanced.

But above all this will require strong, determined and committed leadership.

I am very proud and very honoured to have been Prime Minister of this country for six years.

I believe we have made great steps, with more people in work than ever before in our history; with reforms to welfare and education; increasing people’s life chances; building a bigger and stronger society; keeping our promises to the poorest people in the world, and enabling those who love each other to get married whatever their sexuality.

But above all restoring Britain’s economic strength, and I am grateful to everyone who has helped to make that happen.

I have also always believed that we have to confront big decisions – not duck them.

That’s why we delivered the first Coalition government in seventy years to bring our economy back from the brink. It’s why we delivered a fair, legal and decisive referendum in Scotland. And why I made the pledge to renegotiate Britain’s position in the European Union and hold a referendum on our membership, and have carried those things out.

I fought this campaign in the only way I know how – which is to say directly and passionately what I think and feel – head, heart and soul.

I held nothing back.

I was absolutely clear about my belief that Britain is stronger, safer and better off inside the European Union, and I made clear the referendum was about this and this alone – not the future of any single politician, including myself.

But the British people have made a very clear decision to take a different path, and as such I think the country requires fresh leadership to take it in this direction.

I will do everything I can as Prime Minister to steady the ship over the coming weeks and months, but I do not think it would be right for me to try to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination.

This is not a decision I have taken lightly, but I do believe it is in the national interest to have a period of stability and then the new leadership required.

There is no need for a precise timetable today, but in my view we should aim to have a new Prime Minister in place by the start of the Conservative Party Conference in October.

Delivering stability will be important and I will continue in post as Prime Minister with my Cabinet for the next three months. The Cabinet will meet on Monday.

The Governor of the Bank of England is making a statement about the steps that the Bank and the Treasury are taking to reassure financial markets. We will also continue taking forward the important legislation that we set before Parliament in the Queen’s Speech. And I have spoken to Her Majesty the Queen this morning to advise her of the steps that I am taking.

Outside: Large numbers of people also gathered at the gates of Downing Street - and there were some cheers when he quit

A negotiation with the European Union will need to begin under a new Prime Minister, and I think it is right that this new Prime Minister takes the decision about when to trigger article 50 and start the formal and legal process of leaving the EU.

I will attend the European Council next week to explain the decision the British people have taken and my own decision.

The British people have made a choice. That not only needs to be respected – but those on the losing side of the argument, myself included, should help to make it work.

Britain is a special country.

We have so many great advantages.

A parliamentary democracy where we resolve great issues about our future through peaceful debate; a great trading nation, with our science and arts, our engineering and our creativity respected the world over.

And while we are not perfect, I do believe we can be a model of a multi-racial, multi-faith democracy, where people can come and make a contribution and rise to the very highest that their talent allows.

Although leaving Europe was not the path I recommended, I am the first to praise our incredible strengths. I have said before that Britain can survive outside the European Union and indeed that we could find a way.

Now the decision has been made to leave, we need to find the best way, and I will do everything I can to help.

I love this country – and I feel honoured to have served it.

And I will do everything I can in future to help this great country succeed. 

