'Total shambles!' Fury as people are turned away from voting in EU referendum due to errors at Leighton Buzzard polling station

2016-6-23

Dozens of people have been turned away from voting in today's EU referendum following errors at a polling station.

Some residents in Leighton Buzzard, Bedfordshire, were not included on the registration list and were unable to have their say in today's historic referendum when they turned up to cast their vote this morning.

Angry locals hassled MPs outside Linslade polling station for the 'total shambles', and Central Bedfordshire Council eventually made arrangements for voters who'd missed out. 

Some residents in Leighton Buzzard, Bedfordshire, were not included on the registration list and were turned away when they turned up to cast their vote this morning

Central Bedfordshire Council has now apologised and said the problem has been resolved.

It is making arrangements for voters who were turned away earlier to have their say this afternoon. 

However there are differing reports over how many people missed out on a vote this morning. 

The Council said it was only aware of two voters who were turned away but the local Tory MP Andrew Selous said there were a 'high number' of residents denied a vote. 

Tim Casterton, 56, one of the voters turned away when he turned up at his polling station at Linslade Lower School this morning, told the Leighton Buzzard Observer: 'They said that they didn't have any of the high numbers on the list and they couldn't give me a voting card.

'My neighbour wasn't on there either, it is a total shambles.

The overnight storm hit polling stations across south east London and forced some polling stations to close. Above, voters defy the weather to cast their vote at East Hanningfield School in Essex

People braved torrential rain to cast their ballots in the EU referendum this morning, including in Romford, Essex (pictured) 

'Andrew Selous was outside the station and I spoke to him about it – he said he would ring the returning officer and find out what had happened.

'I heard a few other people with the same complaint.' 

Mr Casterton said he feared he would not be able to vote even if the council has corrected the problem because he has to drive to Durham after work  tonight.

Mr Selous, MP for South West Bedfordshire, said: 'I understand that unfortunately the correct register was not provided to the polling station officers hence the mistake. 

'I understand that anyone who still wishes to vote at the Leopold Road Polling Station who was prevented from being unable to vote this morning can return to the polling station up to 10pm this evening to cast their vote.' 

Meanwhile polling stations across the south east of England have been hit by storms overnight, with some forced to close after being flooded.

Kingston upon Thames Council in south west London has moved two polling stations after they were inundated with water.

Polling stations in Devon Way in Chessington and Shiraz Mirza in New Malden have been relocated, while several others remain difficult to access because of the wet weather.



Voters patiently waited in line outside churches, schools and shopping centres to have their say on whether Britain should stay in the EU. Torrential rain overnight caused flooding at polling stations across the south east

The final polls of the campaign showed the result on a knife-edge, with a YouGov poll giving Remain a two-point lead and two other polls by Opinium and TNS showing the reverse

London Fire Brigade said it had taken more than 550 weather-related emergency calls and attended over 400 incidents caused by heavy rain and thunderstorms.

Firefighters are still attending incidents across London, with the east of the city worst affected.

The pound hit fresh 2016 highs against the dollar today in a further sign that City traders remain convinced the Remain camp will eek out a win in the EU referendum.

Sterling has continued its recent revival, after weeks on the slide amid fears over polls showing a strengthening Leave vote, rising 0.4 per cent to $1.49 and cementing a 6 per cent rise since this time last week. 

Against the euro the pound has stayed in the region €1.30, up from €1.26 a week ago.

In a sign of the possible chaos that could ensure to come once votes have been counted, City banks - including UBS, HSBC, Morgan Stanley and Bank of America Merrill Lynch - have written to clients telling them to prepare for disruption once the EU referendum result is declared. 

According to an article in the Times today, the banks said that they could not guarantee to 'make a market' by acting as intermediaries between buyers and sellers.

If so, the Bank of England might have to step in to buy assets as a 'market maker of last resort', as it did in 2009. 

Voting got underway this morning amid torrential downpours as analysts said that currency traders have been using the bookies and polls to gauge the probably referendum result.

A phone survey from ComRes for ITV gave the Remain camp 54 per cent of the vote compared to Leave's 46 per cent, while YouGov had victory at a much slimmer margin with just 51 per cent voting to Remain against Leave's 49 per cent. 

The last poll from IPSOS Mori put Remain in the lead with 52 per cent, while the Leave camp was at 48 per cent. 

At the same time a Remain vote is now 84 per cent on according to odds compiled by Betfair, compared to 22 per cent for Leave. Ladbrokes puts the chance of Brexit at only 27 per cent. 

FXTM chief market strategist Hussein Sayed said: 'The markets are being completely reliant on the predictions from the bookies, which strongly expect Remain to win the referendum.'

He added: 'There is currently no real explanation to provide as to why city firms are confident on a remain outcome, although it does appear to me as if the correlation between the probability from bookmarkers is what is being mirrored in the markets. 

A fire brigade spokesman said: 'The high volume of weather-related emergency calls received between 0130 and 0630 this morning is nearly twice the total number of all 999 calls that our control officers deal with in a normal day.'

Local residents reported that polling stations in Barking and Newham in east London were difficult to access because of floodwater. 

There were reports of long queues at polling stations across the UK, with voters braving the torrential rain to cast their ballot in the historic referendum. 

Voters patiently waited in line outside churches, schools and shopping centres to have their say on whether Britain should stay in the EU.

The largest number of voters in history will be eligible to vote in the EU referendum, with 46,499,537 people able to vote in the UK and Gibraltar, according to the Electoral Commission, and pundits have speculated the vote could be the highest in UK political history.

Pictures posted on social media show people patiently queuing outside a polling station in West Hampstead, London.

Mauro Murgia, who lives opposite a polling station in West Hampstead, said: 'I took a picture of the queue at around 8.30am and it was the longest queue to a polling station I have ever seen.

'I was surprised because for the London mayoral election there was hardly anyone, I was in and out in three seconds.

'There were around 30 people queuing up outside, luckily the rain had stopped. They were waiting quite patiently.'

Olly Wainwright wrote on Twitter: 'Longest queues I've seen at the Hackney polling station already.'

Nigel Wilkinson tweeted: 'Queues at the polling station. Reports of 20-plus minutes in some places. Going to be a big turnout.'

Lucy Davidson wrote: 'Queues at the polling station. Never seen it so busy. If you live in the UK - take your umbrella and go vote!' 

Out of 3,754 polling stations in the capital, five opened late, a spokeswoman for London Councils said.

In Newham, east London, two stations opened slightly later due to issues with staff travel and flooding, and one station in Tower Hamlets, east London, and one in Redbridge, north-east London, were also affected.

Barking and Dagenham Council in east London apologised when a polling station had to be closed after a water main burst.

A council spokesman said: 'Due to flooding caused as a result of a burst water main, the polling station at St Thomas More Church, Longbridge Road, has had to be relocated.

'We are glad to say that we were able to notify and signpost affected residents first thing this morning.'

The polling station has been relocated to two sites within walking distance.

A spokeswoman for Newham Borough Council said that despite flooding outside one polling station, everyone would be able to vote.

'There should be no problem accessing and assistance is on hand for those needing it,' the council said, adding that teams were out trying to clear the water.

The outside of the polling station at Grange Primary School was flooded and eyewitness Ben March said people were 'hitching up their trousers and wading through the water' to cast their votes.

Merton Council in south-west London tweeted a video of a waterlogged walkway outside the Sacred Heart School polling station in New Malden, advising voters to 'wear your wellies'.

A council spokeswoman said no-one had been turned away and that staff were doing 'everything they can' to guide voters and drivers through and clear water away. 





 

 









