Charity fund in memory of murdered MP Jo Cox soars past £1million as public donate in memory of the tireless campaigner

2016-6-20

A charity fund in memory of murdered politician Jo Cox has soared past £1million as tens of thousands of well-wishers donated in memory of the tireless campaigner.

The fundraising page for the Batley and Spen MP, who was stabbed and shot to death on the street four days ago in Birstall, West Yorkshire, has become GoFundMe's biggest UK campaign to date.

Standing at more than £1million this evening, the donation page was set up by friends of the mother-of-two just after her tragic death, and the funds will be split between three charities.

Up and up: The fundraising page for the Batley and Spen MP, who was stabbed and shot to death on the street four days ago in Birstall, West Yorkshire, has become GoFundMe's biggest UK campaign to date

Tributes: A sea of flowers placed at a memorial in Birstall, West Yorkshire, where Labour MP Jo Cox was shot and stabbed to death in the street outside her constituency advice surgery last Thursday

Looking on: Flowers were placed around the statue of Joseph Priestley, the theologian who discovered oxygen

Chosen by her family, these are The Royal Voluntary Service, anti-extremism group Hope Not Hate and Syria-based volunteer search and rescue organisation The White Helmets. 

The fund was pushed past the seven-figure mark by a £6,000 donation from a 'David Newton'.

Mrs Cox's friend Tim Dixon, one of those who launched the fund, said: 'The scale and speed of the public response to this fund has been overwhelming and deeply gratifying to Jo's family.

'It shows how powerfully Jo's story has moved so many. Jo would be so proud.' 

Mrs Cox's husband Brendan tweeted tonight: 'Thank you to everyone for your incredible generosity. This will change lives in Syria, Batley and across the UK.'





A GoFundMe spokesman said: 'We were saddened to hear about the tragic death of Jo Cox.

'It's amazing to see how many people have come together to raise money for the charity's closest to Jo's heart in her memory. Our thoughts are with her family at this incredibly difficult time.'

A statement from Mrs Cox's friends and family, who set up the page, said they were 'overwhelmed by everyone's incredible generosity and so grateful for all your donations'.

Last week, a campaign raising money for the victims of the Pulse shooting in Orlando raised over $5million (£3.4million), in five days making it the largest and fastest crowd-funding appeal ever.

It comes amid an outpouring of grief as politicians returned to Parliament to pay tribute to Mrs Cox and the man charged with her murder appeared in a London court for a bail hearing this afternoon.

Memorial: Flowers are laid by members of the Jammu Kashmir National Awami Party in Birstall this morning

Flowers in Birstall: The tributes today come amid an outpouring of grief in Britain and many other countries

The Commons was recalled to allow MPs to honour their colleague as David Cameron spoke of the sadness Britain felt at the killing of the 'loving, determined, passionate and progressive politician'.

The man accused of Mrs Cox's killing, Thomas Mair, 52, appeared at the Old Bailey as he was brought before a senior judge under the 'terrorism protocol'. 

He is charged with murder, grievous bodily harm, possession of a firearm with intent to commit an indictable offence and possession of an offensive weapon. 



Labour politician: Married Mrs Cox had two young children and was the MP for Batley and Spen

Also today, Ukip leader Nigel Farage accused David Cameron and the Remain campaign of a 'despicable' attempt to create a link between the EU referendum and the death of Mrs Cox to improve their chances of winning Thursday's referendum.

Mr Farage said Remain were 'scared witless' about the prospect of defeat on June 23 and were trying to 'conflate' the motivations of the Labour MP's alleged killer with those of the millions of voters who want to leave the EU.

Mr Cameron has faced criticism from some quarters for retweeting a link to the last article written by Mrs Cox, in which she argued that Britain could deal with the issue of immigration more effectively by remaining in the EU.

MPs are also set to meet police and parliamentary authorities today to discuss their security in the wake of the death of Mrs Cox.

Home Secretary Theresa May will co-chair the meeting, where representatives of the Metropolitan Police and Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority will answer questions from MPs.

Meanwhile, calls are growing for the pensioner who tried to save MP Jo Cox to be officially honoured for his bravery.

Bernard Kenny, 77, was stabbed in the stomach as he came to the aid of Mrs Cox when she was attacked outside the library on Thursday. He is recovering in hospital.

Mr Kenny is said to be a former miner who was part of the rescue teams which helped at the Lofthouse Colliery disaster in 1973. Seven men died when part of the now-closed pit flooded.

An online petition has been set up calling on the Government to award Mr Kenny the George Cross - the highest bravery honour that can be given to non-military personnel.

Separately, the charity Oxfam said today that Mrs Cox will be honoured with an album of live music from the Glastonbury Festival which will raise money for refugees.

A poignant video emerged today of MP Jo Cox at a fish and chip shop lending her support to an 18-year-old girl she was campaigning on behalf of to be recognised as Britain's youngest frier.

In what is thought to be Mrs Cox's last ever appearance on video, she visits Heckmondwike's Yorkshire Chippy, which claims to be Britain's first gluten-free-only fish and chip shop.

Founder and director Jad Choudhury, 31, released two videos to MailOnline of Mrs Cox's visit on Thursday, June 9, speaking during what is believed to be her last trip to a business.

He said how Mrs Cox was going to write a letter to get the shop's frier Paige Ramsden recognised as Britain's youngest frier – and she lends her support to Paige Ramsden in the video clip.

Mrs Cox says: 'Hi there, I'm Jo Cox MP, member of parliament for Batley and Spen, and I'm here at Yorkshire's gluten free chippy with Paige, the amazing Paige, who we think might well be our country's youngest frier, is that right Paige? And who are you?

Miss Ramsden then responds by saying: 'Well. I'm Paige, I'm 18, and I'm a frier at Yorkshire Chippy, the first gluten free fish and chip shop in history.'

Mrs Cox then continues: 'Brilliant, so come along down and enjoy the fish and chips.'

In another clip for the business, she says: 'Hi, I'm Jo Cox MP, member of parliament for Batley and Spen, and I'm just about to tuck into an amazing gluten free fish and chips package down here.

'History has been made here in Heckmondwike. We've got the first in history gluten free chippy, right here in Heckmondwike in Yorkshire. So do come along, and really these are amazing chips and brilliant fish. Come and join me.'

Mr Choudhury said: 'Her last visit to a business was us. She came down because she's been part of the business from the planning - she really wanted to put Heckmondwike on the map.

'We're the first ever gluten free fish and shop chop. Before I even started the business I got in touch with her. She's really keen to support the business. We've only been going since March.

Appearance:  Mrs Cox tweeted a photo of her visit to Heckmondwike's Yorkshire Chippy with its manager Tracy Smylie (left), 18-year-old frier Paige Ramsden (centre) and server Lindsay Broadley (right)

'She came down last week to try our fish and chips. She was supposed to come back to us this week with her family to have fish and chips with her family. It's tragic.

'She had a heart of gold. She was very friendly, very bubble, she treated everyone equally, she had no ego. She took her time to speak to everyone here and she was just loyal.'

Asked why he started the shop, he said: 'To support the coeliacs out there. Coeliacs always pay a premium to eat out - but we wanted to provide an equal opportunity where they can eat fish and chips.

'It's much better (than normal fish and chips), it's more organic. Even on TripAdvisor we've been getting five stars - even from people who are non-coeliacs. We're a fish and chip shop with a twist.

'Jo was going to write a letter to get her (Miss Ramsden) recognised as Britain's youngest frier.'

