'I did all I could': Jeremy Corbyn confronts angry Labour activists calling for him to quit over lacklustre Remain campaign 

2016-6-24

Jeremy Corbyn has claimed he did 'all he could' to prevent the UK leaving the EU as pressure mounts on him to resign. 

Today angry activists criticised him for 'failing to get working class votes' after dozens of typical Labour heartlands in the north and Wales voted for Leave.

And the embattled Labour leader, who was attending London's Pride festival, was criticised for 'using the LGBTQ community' to 'protect his leadership'. 

But Mr Corbyn defended his Brexit campaign record and told activists that 'I did all I could'.

Labour's John McDonnell, the shadow chancellor, went as far as saying Mr Corbyn, 67, 'worked himself to the ground' despite many on the right and left criticising him for a 'lacklustre' effort.





Scroll down for video

Mr Corbyn was vocally attacked by Labour activists as he took part in Gay Pride in London today

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn made no comment on his own future as Labour leader today despite an attempt to oust him with a no confidence motion 

Mr Corbyn attempted to get back on the front foot earlier today with a major speech on immigration, blasting an 'irresponsible' debate during the campaign and demanding the Government focus more on the public's worries about how migrants impact on public services.

As many as 200 Labour MPs are expected to back a no confidence motion in Mr Corbyn if it is called to a secret ballot on Tuesday.

But asked today if he would contest any leadership contest that follows, Mr Corbyn told Sky News: 'Yes. I'm here.'  



Labour MP Frank Field today claimed Mr Corbyn should recognise he cannot return Labour to power and quit for the good of the party.  

In his speech, the Labour leader insisted the concerns about immigration and its impact on public services and housing.

He said: 'We have to address the needs of people and places that have been left behind, building an economic strategy that works for all, in all parts of the country'

'And we have to move beyond the irresponsible debate that we sometimes have that makes people afraid or that accuses people of being Little Englanders or racists just for raising the issue.

'It is clear from the vote on Thursday and from the people I have spoken to across Britain … that there was a backlash against the free movement of people across the 28 nations in the European Union.' 



Labour leader Mr Corbyn tried to get back on the front foot today after the shock Brexit vote with a speech on immigration 

Mr Corbyn insisted he was elected as Labour leader 'to redistribute power and wealth in this country' but otherwise did not address his own role.

He said: 'Inequality is the issue of our times and we must face it and act decisively against it.

'We must talk about immigration but we will never pander to prejudice.

'So, as we begin in the coming weeks and months … to negotiate – in all its complexity – our exit from the European Union we must also debate the Britain we want that will be shaped by how that exit takes place.' 

Brexit backer Mr Field praised the Labour leader for focusing on public frustrations with the impact of globalisation but said his pitch was tainted by 'serious claptrap' in other areas.

Labour MP Frank Field today called for Mr Corbyn to resign for the good of the party 

The embattled Opposition leader has rejected calls for his resignation amid growing fury at his failure to galvanise the party's traditional supporters to turn out in favour of EU membership.

There is alarm within the party at the way a series of traditional Labour strongholds in the North and Midlands voted heavily for Leave, with many voters citing concerns about immigration.

Mr Corbyn is facing a vote of no confidence from some of his MPs, as many express concern at the possibility of him leading the party into a snap autumn general election.

Mr Field had said Mr Corbyn should use today's speech to follow Mr Cameron and announce his departure.

'One of the dilemmas that we have is that Jeremy is the only senior politician who has tried to grapple with and put forward views of that group of the electorate who are the losers by globalisation,' he told BBC Radio 4's Today.

'Jeremy's problems are that he packages this with serious claptrap. For example our defence policy that we will have Trident, we will renew Trident but of course we won't have any weapons, has our supporters and probably the rest of the country lying down on the floor and yelling with rage or just simply crying

'We are into an era of new politics where those people who have lost out clearly by globalisation, for the first time have found their voice through the referendum to saying in this country 'enough is enough'.

'What Jeremy has been trying to do, with his social justice programme, is begin to answer those questions that are posed by the losers of globalisation but he clearly isn't the right person to actually lead the party into an election because nobody thinks he will actually win.

'I would very much like him to do that and set the debate going with that kind of flavour.'

Within hours of the referendum result, Labour MPs launched their plot to oust Mr Corbyn next week over his 'abysmal' performance in the EU referendum campaign.

Furious MPs said Mr Corbyn 'had to take his share of responsibility' for the referendum result, which saw huge numbers of voters in Labour heartlands back Brexit.

Last night Mr Corbyn indicated he will try to brazen it out, telling Channel 4 News: 'I will not resign.' He will attempt to get on the front foot today with a speech on immigration in London.

Furious MPs said Jeremy Corbyn 'had to take his share of responsibility' for the referendum result, which saw huge numbers of voters in Labour heartlands back Brexit

But Labour grandee Dame Margaret Hodge and backbencher Ann Coffey tabled a formal motion of no confidence in Mr Corbyn yesterday. Last night ten MPs had signed it.

Scores of other Labour figures publicly criticised Mr Corbyn, and some sources believe close to 200 of the party's 232 MPs may back the motion when they vote on it in a secret ballot next week.

Dame Margaret said: 'The referendum was a test of leadership and I think Jeremy failed that test. He came out too slowly, he was very half-hearted about his attempts to campaign and Labour voters simply didn't get the message.'

The motion has no legal force under Labour's rules, but some Labour MPs say it would be 'untenable' for Mr Corbyn to cling on if he faces a public vote of no confidence from his own MPs.

A spokesman for Mr Corbyn described the attempted coup as 'self-indulgent', pointing out the Labour leader was given a huge mandate when he was elected less than a year ago.

But there were signs they were taking the threat seriously, with Mr Corbyn pulling out of a planned appearance tomorrow at Glastonbury Festival. A spokesman said: 'He is focusing on the immediate issues from the EU vote.'

Mr Corbyn, a lifelong Eurosceptic, struggled to make a convincing case for Remain and was yesterday spotted laughing with aides over breakfast in the Commons in the immediate wake of the Brexit vote.

Labour grandee Dame Margaret Hodge and backbencher Ann Coffey tabled a formal motion of no confidence in Mr Corbyn yesterday. Last night ten MPs had signed it

Former Cabinet minister Ben Bradshaw said: 'This was a catastrophic defeat. I think Jeremy is a decent man but his leadership, or rather lack of it, particularly during the referendum campaign, has been abysmal. 

A motion of no confidence has been tabled against Jeremy Corbyn to be heard by the party next week.

 If accepted, it will be voted on Tuesday, when as many as 200 MPs could vote against Mr Corbyn.

However, the motion has no legal force, and Mr Corbyn's allies last night indicated he would try to brazen it out – leading Labour MPs to search for an alternative way to oust their leader.

The rules for removing a Labour leader are largely untested and designed to make it difficult for potential pretenders to seize the crown. Anyone wanting to mount a formal leadership challenge needs the public support of 51 Labour MPs and MEPs to trigger a contest.

Some MPs believe they could easily gather the names needed. But they are not united around a single candidate, and many fear Mr Corbyn would automatically be placed on the ballot paper – meaning his army of activists may well re-elect him.



'Like David Cameron, he needs to shoulder his share of the responsibility and ... step down.'

Former shadow chancellor Chris Leslie said he 'would need an awful lot of persuading to have confidence in Jeremy's leadership going into a general election', while MP Graham Jones said: 'I want a damn good explanation from Jeremy Corbyn as to why we ended up in this mess. If I am not satisfied, I will support the motion.'

Tony Blair said Mr Corbyn was 'pretty lukewarm' about staying in the EU while Peter Mandelson said he 'seemed to be travelling through the entire referendum with a handbrake on'. Ex-spin chief Alastair Campbell and Labour's former energy spokesman Caroline Flint both said Mr Corbyn had failed to connect with the voters they lost.

Stephen Kinnock, a prominent Remain supporter, also indicated he is prepared to vote for the motion.

But shadow chancellor John McDonnell, one of Mr Corbyn's closest allies, said the Labour leader has 'overwhelming support' among grassroots activists. 

In a major boost last night, more than 80,000 activists signed a petition supporting Mr Corbyn and 12 of Britain's biggest unions – including Unite, Unison and the GMB – backed the Labour leader. They said: 'The last thing Labour needs is a manufactured leadership row in the midst of this crisis.'

Now it's Project Spite from EU cheerleaders

The fiercely pro-EU Left-wing establishment reacted with bitterness and disbelief yesterday following the dramatic vote for Leave:

PETER MANDELSON

Former EU Commissioner and business secretary Lord Mandelson said it was 'the worst day in post war British history'.

The former MP for Hartlepool said that people in the North East 'were sold this ridiculous notion that coming out of the European Union was some sort of 'magic bullet' to solve all our country's problems with immigration'.

Former business secretary Lord Mandelson said it was 'the worst day in post war British history'

'You should've looked really at the small print of what the Leave people were saying,' Lord Mandelson added. 'They didn't have one shred of an idea, not one single policy that explained how immigration would be changed if we came out of the European Union … I really regret we were not more successful in countering that ridiculous, fantasy politics and propaganda that spewed out of the Leave campaign.'

TONY BLAIR

The strongly pro-EU former prime minister said Brexit made him 'sad for our country, for Europe, for the world'. He also said the Labour leadership was 'pretty lukewarm in its support for Remain' and had failed to show its supporters the 'enormous consequences' of a Leave vote and to help them 'understand that this was not a protest vote against the Government'.

'The answers to the challenges of globalisation do not lie in shutting ourselves off from the world,' he said in an interview with Sky News.

'I think what we will learn in these days, weeks and months ahead is that you can ride the anger through these populist movements but you don't actually produce the answers to the challenges people face ... We will find that what people thought was going to be an answer to these problems is not an answer at all.'

The strongly pro-EU former prime minister said Brexit made him 'sad for our country, for Europe, for the world'

KEITH VAZ

Labour MP for Leicester East and former Europe minister Keith Vaz said the result was a 'catastrophe'. He told the BBC: 'Frankly, in a thousand years I would never have believed that the British people would have voted this way.

'And they have done so and I think that they voted emotionally rather than looking at the facts. It'll be catastrophic for our country, for the rest of Europe and indeed the world.'

He added: 'The issues of immigration are extremely important, if you look at the campaign I think that there needed to be a much stronger campaign to stay in.'

ALASTAIR CAMPBELL

The former Labour spin doctor said Britain is now in 'uncharted territory' and warned the break-up of the UK will follow.

'One of the so-called Project Fear arguments that we kept trying to get over in this campaign is that there were incredible possible unintended consequences of a vote to leave the European Union,' he said. 'One is the break-up of the United Kingdom, I think we are looking at that.'

He told ITV News: 'We saw what happened in Scotland and I think we are now seeing something similar in parts of the North of England. I think the whole question of the union now comes into view.'

Former spin doctor Alistair Campbell warned of the unintended consequences of Brexit, including the break up of the United Kingdom

POLLY TOYNBEE

The Guardian columnist said: 'What dark place does Britain for the British take us to? Catastrophe. Britain has broken apart.

'An uprising of resentment by the left-behind has torn us in two, a country wrecked by a yawning class divide stretched wider by recession and austerity. Anger against a London establishment was deftly diverted by the Tory right and Ukip towards foreigners – enemies in Brussels and aliens in our midst.'

She added: ' 'Controlling our borders', [Brexit voters] will expect immigrants, new and old, to be gone. They were told more housing, GP appointments and school places would be freed up from migrants. But as treasury receipts fall, there will be less of everything. Will the next call be to expel foreigners already here? What dark place does Britain for the British take us to?'

EMILY THORNBERRY 

'It won't be people like Boris Johnson who suffer, but those whose heads are only just above water,' said the Islington South MP.

Miss Thornberry, who was forced to resign from Ed Miliband's shadow Cabinet for a 'sneering' post on Twitter of a house in Rochester with England flags and a white van outside, added: 'A lot of people in Islington depend on our country's internationalism. To leave will simply be dreadful and the Islington vote recognises that.' Islington overwhelmingly voted to stay in the EU, with 76,420 remain votes to 25,180 for leave.



