The EU could be REVITALISED after Brexit, says top German Eurocrat

2016-6-16

Günther Oettinger (pictured) the Digital Commissioner for the European Commission said Britain's exit could allow the EU to 'develop a new perspective' and 'gather new dynamics'

Brexit could allow the EU to 'develop a new perspective and 'gather new dynamics' a top German Eurocrat has suggested.

Günther Oettinger, the European Commission's digital chief, said Brussels would be able to speed up development of its common security policy, foreign policy and anti-terrorism powers because Britain is one of the main opponents to further European integration.

His remarkable intervention just a week before British voters have their say in the EU referendum marks a significant break in silence from the unpopular European Commission, which has been careful to stay silent on the referendum to avoid deterring voters from backing Brexit. 

Oettinger stressed his desire for Britain to stay in the Brussels club. He also warned of a possible 'domino effect' and of the dangers for trade with countries such as Denmark and Germany.

But his candid views yesterday signal some in the EU's governing institution can see potential benefits if the UK does choose to leave.

Speaking at a Politico event this week, he said: 'On the timescale I have to say my expectation is that the European project would gather new dynamics, after the elections in France without Marine Le Pen and after the elections in Germany with Angela Merkel.

'Mr Juppe, our chancellor, Jean-Claude Juncker and (European Council president Donald) Tusk could probably move us all closer to the European objectives, they could probably work out a new perspective.

‘This great challenge of the refugee crisis could offer us a great opportunity, we need a common external policy, we need foreign aid policy, we need security policy.'

According to a translation from the German, he added: 'So if we leave the election year 2017 behind us then I think we will gather some more power and strength and I really believe in that.' 

Asked why the European Commission had been so silent on Britain's EU referendum, Oettinger joked: 'We always hoped the queen or the pope would say something, that is why we held back.'

Other German officials have said the country wants Britain to stay in the EU.

Ulrich Grillo, head of Germany's BDI industry association, said earlier this week that businesses in Europe's largest economy did not want Britain to leave the EU, adding that his message to Britain was: 'Stay in'.

A survey published last week showed that almost two-thirds of German companies are uncertain what the effect of Britain leaving the EU would be on their business. 

Donald Tusk, left, runs European Council summits and was a key figure in helping David Cameron hammer out his deal with the EU in February, pictured, and earlier this week he delivered an extraordinary warning that Brexit would trigger the end of Western civilisation 

While most European  politicians have complied with instructions to avoid causing any controversy that could sway the referendum, European Council president Donald Tusk made an extraordinary intervention earlier this week by warning a Brexit vote would trigger the end of Western civilisation.  



In apocalyptic comments in an interview with German newspaper Bild, Mr Tusk - who runs Brussels summit for leaders of EU states - said 'no-one could forsee' the consequences of Brexit.

'Why is it so dangerous? Because no one can foresee what the long-term consequences would be,' Mr Tusk said. 

'As a historian I fear that Brexit could be the beginning of the destruction of not only the EU but also of western political civilisation in its entirety.' 



He argued that everyone in the European Union would lose out economically if Britain left.

'Every family knows that a divorce is traumatic for everyone,' Mr Tusk said. 

'Everyone in the EU, but especially the Brits themselves, would lose out economically.' 

The European Commission (pictured) would be able to speed up development of its common security policy, foreign policy and anti-terrorism powers if Britain left the EU, Günther Oettinger, the Digital Commissioner suggested

 













 

