The murder that shocked the world: Messages of horror and sympathy appear on the front pages across the globe over the death of Jo Cox 

2016-6-17

The murder of British MP Jo Cox - shot and stabbed yesterday on the streets of her constituency - has made front page news in papers all over the world. 

The 'assassination' of the Labour MP was on the front page of newspapers in France, Belgium, Germany, Australia, New Zealand and Japan and also featured heavily on online news websites.

Many newspapers linked it to the European Union referendum as Mrs Cox was a strong campaigner for Britain to remain in the EU, as well as being a supporter of human rights and the plight of Syrian refugees. 

Belgium's Le Soir newspaper carried a headline which read: 'The Brexit debate turns into a tragedy'

La Repubblica, a left-leaning newspaper in Italy, carried a headline which read: 'Brexit, blood on referendum as woman who was symbol of Labour killed'. 

Belgium's leading French-language newspaper, Le Soir, carried the headline: 'The Brexit debate turns into tragedy'.

Dutch finance minister Jeroen Dijseelbloem, said: 'The UK is a beacon for peaceful politics, and we hope that the British public...can make their democratic choices serenely and in a safe way next week.'

A large photograph of the vigil at a church in Birstall made it onto the front of one of Brazil's biggest newspapers, the Folha de Sao Paulo 

'Brexit, blood on the referendum, murdered woman symbol of Labour', reads the headline on the left-wing La Repubblica newspaper in Italy

Several newspapers, including the New Zealand Herald and Bild in Germany, highlighted the threats and hate mail that Mrs Cox had received in the months prior to her death.

For some countries the killing provoked memories of attacks in their own past. 



Sweden's Dagens Nyheter newspaper carried a picture of the Labour MP and the flowers left in Parliament Square, with the simple headline: 'Killed during campaign'.

The killing resonated in Sweden as it came 13 years after foreign minister Anna Lindh was stabbed to death in a Stockholm department store. 



The headline of one of Sweden's leading newspapers reads: 'Killed during campaign'



Lindh's killer, Mijailo Mijailović, claimed to have heard 'voices in his head' but he was ruled sane and jailed for life. 

Anton, in Sweden, tweeted: 'In 2003 FM Anna Lindh was assassinated. Attacks like these a blow against openness in society. (They) Force politicians to be apart from the people.' 

In the US the attack on the 41-year-old evoked memories of the attempted assassination in 2011 of Congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords in Arizona, in which six people were killed. 

Jo Cox's murder was front page news on the Globe and Mail, one of Canada's most important papers



The murder of Jo Cox evoked memories in the American press of the shooting of congresswoman Gabby Giffords, who survived an attack in 2011 which killed six people



Mrs Giffords tweeted: 'Absolutely sickened to hear of the assassination of Jo Cox. She was young, courageous and hardworking. A rising star, mother, and wife.'

She blamed her death on 'hatred that is a manifestation of a coarseness in our politics that must stop.'

Hillary Clinton said: 'I am horrified by the assassination of British MP Jo Cox, murdered...in her district in Northern England. By all accounts, she was a rising star.

'Her maiden speech in Parliament celebrated the diversity of her beloved Yorkshire constituency, and passionately made the case that there is more that unites us than divides us. It is cruel and terrible that her life was cut short by a violent act of political intolerance.' 

The presumptive Democratic nominee for the White House said it was 'critical' that Britain and the US stood together against 'hatred and violence'.

She called on supporters of democracy to honour Jo Cox by 'rejecting bigotry in all its forms'.

Germany's best-selling Bild newspaper claimed Jo Cox had been threatened for several months

The French President Francois Hollande, who has been battling terrorism from ISIS, including the murder of a French police commander and his wife this week, said: 'I express my deep sadness after the murder of Jo Cox.

'I offer my condolences to her family and my solidarity to the British people,' he said.

Australia's Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull tweeted: 'Deeply shocked by the murder of UK MP Jo Cox. Our condolences, prayers and solidarity are with her family & the people of the UK.'

Spain's ABC newspaper indelibly links Jo Cox's murder to the Brexit referendum

The New Zealand Herald also mentioned the hate mail campaign against Jo Cox



One of the few politicians not to have commented on her death was Donald Trump, a long-time opponent of gun control, who is planning to visit Britain on the day of the EU referendum.

Cairo-based feminist Mona Eltahawy simply tweeted a list of women politicians who have been killed or wounded over the years: 'Jo Cox (UK), Salwa Bugaighis (Libya), Benazir Bhutto (Pakistan), Gabby Giffords (USA), Anna Lindh (Sweden), Indira Gandhi (India).' 

News of the murder came out too late for most US newspapers, although they are expected to feature it in Friday's front pages. 



'Murder in Brexit-battle' is the bold headline in De Telegraaf in the Netherlands

The Washington Post, considered the paper of record in the US, clearly considered Jo Cox's murder one of the most important stories

France's Le Monde newspaper reported that the killing was an 'attack on democracy'

Portugal's Diario de Noticias newspaper reports on the suspension of campaigning after Jo Cox's murder

Argentina's Clarin newspaper said the killing of Jo Cox was a 'confusing episode'

Turkey's Hurriyet newspaper headline simply reads: 'British MP loses her life in attack'

The attack on Jo Cox was also headline news in Japan's Yomiuri Shimbun newspaper 





