'Hatred will never solve problems, Jo believed that': Jeremy Corbyn leads tributes to tragic Labour MP as David Cameron says a devastated Westminster has lost a 'great star'

2016-6-16

Jeremy Corbyn last night addressed a tearful vigil in Westminster to pay tribute to Jo Cox and warn that 'hatred will never solve problems'.

After Prime Minister David Cameron said Britain had lost a 'great star' from its public life, the Labour leader led mourning in Parliament Square.

Politicians from across the political spectrum revealed their grief after news of Mrs Cox's death was confirmed shortly after 5pm. 

Surrounded by weeping MPs from all parties, Mr Corbyn said last night: 'Tonight, her husband Brendan is devastated and their two children have lost a mum they will never see again, lost somebody they can remember as a wonderful woman who stood for many things.

'She was an exemplary MP, a real servant of democracy in every way.

'The statement put out this evening by her husband Brendan saying we had to conquer hatred with love, with solidarity and with support, is one of the most moving statements I have ever heard from someone so recently bereaved.

'I am surrounded by parliamentary colleagues, particularly those who came into Parliament with her in the general election last year. There is a special bond among newly elected MPs, the class of 2015 and they are grieving deeply this evening.'

Scroll down for video 

Jeremy Corbyn, surrounded by (front row from left) Stephen Doughty, Alison McGovern, Mr Corbyn, Cat Smith and Holly Lynch, paid an emotional tribute in Parliament Square to Jo Cox last night

Flowers were laid in Parliament Square last night in memory of the Batley and Spen MP as emotional tributes to the killed MP grew

Mr Corbyn said: 'Remembering her, remembering all she gave, and we are desperately sad tonight at the loss of such a lovely woman who had everything to live for.

Tributes were paid to Jo Cox tonight from politicians across Westminster, regardless of party affiliation 

'This is a shocking occasion and I hope everyone realises hatred will never solve problems.

'Only people coming together will solve problems - Jo believed that, Brendan believed that, we believe that.' 



The Prime Minister, who has cancelled his referendum campaigning, said it was 'tragic and dreadful news' and sent his thought's to Mrs Cox's husband Brendan. 



Mr Cameron said: 'This is absolutely tragic and dreadful news. My thoughts are with Jo's husband Brendan, her two children, and their wider family.

'We have lost a great star.

'She was a great campaigning MP with huge compassion and a big heart and people are going to be very, very sad at what has happened. Dreadful, dreadful news.

'It's right we are suspending campaigning activity in this referendum and everyone's thought will be with Jo's family and with her constituents at this terrible time.'

In an earlier statement, Mr Corbyn said: 'The whole of the Labour Party and Labour family - and indeed the whole country - will be in shock at the horrific murder of Jo Cox today.

'Jo had a lifelong record of public service and a deep commitment to humanity.

'She worked both for Oxfam and the anti-slavery charity, the Freedom Fund, before she was elected last year as MP for Batley and Spen – where she was born and grew up.

Flags over Westminster were dropped to half mast overnight and remained there today in a mark of respect to Mrs Cox 

'Jo was dedicated to getting us to live up to our promises to support the developing world and strengthen human rights – and she brought those values and principles with her when she became an MP.

Mr Corbyn said: 'Jo died doing her public duty at the heart of our democracy, listening to and representing the people she was elected to serve. It is a profoundly important cause for us all.

'Jo was universally liked at Westminster, not just by her Labour colleagues, but across Parliament.

'In the coming days, there will be questions to answer about how and why she died. But for now all our thoughts are with Jo's husband Brendan and their two young children. They will grow up without their mum, but can be immensely proud of what she did, what she achieved and what she stood for.

Labour MP Mary Creagh laid flowers close to the scene of Mrs Cox's death in Birstall , Yorkshire

Staff from Parliament and passers by laid their own floral tributes to the dead MP across the street from the main gates of the Palace of Westminster 



'We send them our deepest condolences. We have lost a much loved colleague, a real talent and a dedicated campaigner for social justice and peace. But they have lost a wife and a mother, and our hearts go out to them.'

Speaking on Radio 4's Today programme this morning, Labour's Yvette Cooper paid tribute to her colleage.   

'I remember Jo as somebody who saw life and shook it up,' she said. 'It’s unbearable that she’s had hers stolen away. Most of us are struggling to process it. The shock has not sunk in. She never opted for the easy path, she walked towards problems rather than walk away. You saw her do that by championing the cause of refugees.

‘She was brilliant. She seized on things, was a fierce advocate for what she believed in and a fiercely believed in her family. She was a fantastic mum as well as politician

‘I think we all take the advice of police on closing our offices. We will all tell you it’s important for MPS to be embedded in the communities we represent. Sometimes you write people’s problems down on the back of a till receipt. Daily conversations with constituents are so important. But you also want to make sure your staff are protected.

‘So many encounters you have with people are warm. These cases break hearts and hit the headlines, but at the vigil last night there were so many people there who had met Jo once or twice but as a result of her kindness wanted to pay tribute to her.

David Cameron  paid tribute to Mrs Cox and said she was a 'star' in Parliament who had 'huge compassion and a big heart'

‘We don’t know the circumstances in this case but there has been an increase in vitriol in public debate. Some directed at officials, and some directed at each other. There’s a feel that there is a nastiness in public debate now and none of us want to see that. It’s only four years since the Olympics where we had a feeling of pride and everyone coming together to support the country.

‘There is some vitriol around part of the referendum debate which is a bit nasty but the thing about Jo is she would always argue to bring people together, have healthy debate and unite people. Like her husband said, we cannot let hate win.

‘She was the host of every party, she would joke about calamine lotion for her kids chicken pox, she would joke in the corridor. It was her determination to change people’s lives which we will remember.'

And Holly Lynch added: 'Jo she always seemed to have a real clarity based on her experiences about what she was there to achieve. She did that with a passion and compassion for people she represented both in her home town and right across the world. She used her personality and experience to build support for what she wanted to achieve across the chamber. You saw that in the tributes from across the political spectrum yesterday.'

Ms Lynch said the balance between being active within the community, and being mindful of a potential security risk 'was a challenge for us all'. 

'To be a good MP you have to be rooted in your constituency and be available as much as possible to hear people’s problems and make a difference. It’s difficult when you see something like this which is unprecedented to think about what the future looks like and about security risks.

'We’ll never forget what happened to her and you do have to bear in mind the safety of your staff and so you cannot avoid taking these risks and concerns very seriously, but can’t let it stop you being an effective MP.

‘We had similar constituencies. In Halifax I would regularly meet her to compare notes to what was working and what challenges we shared. We’ve all been taken aback by the nature and tone of this referendum and had conversations about what the future might mean.

Mr Cameron said the loss of Jo Cox was a 'tragedy' as he offered condolences to her family, including husband Brendan and the couple's two young children 

Mr Cameron, pictured on Gibraltar yesterday, called off a referendum rally on the Rock in response to the killing

‘We shared concerns about how you can be an effective MP dealing with people who have strong and different opinions to yours. You have to get used to working in that environment.

‘Everyone who comes to see you has a serious problem and wants to work with you to solve that, but we need to work around politics so we have the ability to work with people who have different opinions and keep doing our jobs to make a difference.

‘She was a hero, she just had that dynamism and clarity about what she was here to do and wanting to make a difference. She had a family and that was always a balancing act for her but she made it look easy. For the rest of us she set an example as to how it should be done and how to make a difference. She did it with a smile and an efficiency based on her experience that won her respect of colleagues across the chamber.’ 









Labour deputy leader Tom Watson said: 'The whole of the Labour movement is devastated at Jo's death. We have lost a colleague so young who had much more to contribute to public life. She was our future.

'It is hard to comprehend how a compassionate, principled and beautiful person can be taken away from us so cruelly. It's even more devastating because she was doing what she did best - serving her constituents.

'We grieve her loss. Our love and prayers are with Brendan and Jo's family.'

MP Jake Berry tweeted a picture of tributes which began to be laid in Parliament Square last night as a shattered Westminster was left reeling by news of Mrs Cox's killing

Labour MP Barry Gardiner said Mrs Cox was the 'brightest best' and questioned what British politics had come to if people were shot for their views 

Commons speaker John Bercow said: 'I am absolutely devastated to learn the news about Jo Cox. 

'Jo was an outstanding Member of Parliament and a wonderful, kind, caring person who was liked and respected in all parts of the House.

'My thoughts and prayers are with her family at this harrowing time.'



Theresa May said Mrs Cox was one of the 'brightest and most popular' MPs and the pain her family and friends are suffering is 'unimaginable'.

The Home Secretary added: 'Our thoughts and prayers are with them at this terrible time.

'The full details of what happened outside Jo's constituency surgery in Birstall this afternoon are not yet clear and until the facts have been fully established I will not comment further.

'It is entirely appropriate that all campaigning for the referendum has been suspended.

'All of us are united in our deep sadness at the loss of one of our brightest and most popular Westminster colleagues.'

Former Labour MP Joan Walley, in whose parliamentary office Ms Cox had worked before becoming an MP herself, was being interviewed on BBC Radio 4's PM programme as news of her death came in.

Ex Labour deputy leader Harriet Harman said the news was 'devastating'

Cambridge MP Daniel Zeichner, elected with Ms Cox for the first time in 2015, said he was 'heartbroken' 

Labour's Catherine McKinnell said Mrs Cox was 'one in a million' 

Tulip Siddiq, another member of Labour's 2015 intake of MPs, said Mrs Cox was a 'wonderful person' 

A clearly distressed Ms Walley said: 'Nothing has prepared me to be in a situation where I'm live on BBC radio to pay tribute to a really, truly special and compassionate woman, who totally believed in public service, who totally believed in eradicating poverty, who totally wanted to see environmental improvements, with a young family and a whole life in politics in front of her.

'Words can't express what I feel because Jo's life and everything she believed in are so badly needed now.

'My thoughts and prayers are with her family and I just hope all Jo's many family, friends, admirers, whatever political side they are, will unite to think about her, to think about our parliamentary democracy and to think what we can do together to be true to the things she believed in.'

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, pictured last night, paid his own tribute to Mrs Cox 

Former international development secretary Andrew Mitchell told PM: 'My thoughts - as everyone across Parliament's will be - are with her husband Brendan and her two lovely little children, who used to come into Portcullis House to have tea with her during the week.

'It is an unspeakable and un-understandable event that has taken place, and Parliament and her constituents will be much the poorer for her passing.

'But it's her family and those two little children who we must be thinking about now.'

Labour MP Jess Phillips said: 'My heart is broken. She was amazing, a brave giant who stood against bullies.'

Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond said: 'Deeply saddened by news of the death of Jo Cox.'

Scotland's First Minister Nicola Sturgeon said: 'I didn't know Jo Cox but by all accounts she was a brilliant young MP.

'And today she was just doing her job. My heart breaks for her family.'

Tory MP Anne Marie-Trevelyan tweeted images of Mrs Cox, far left top and bottom, on the cross-party tug of war team during a charity event last week  

Liberal Democrat leader Tim Farron said: 'I am utterly heartbroken at the news of the death of Jo Cox. This is a devastating attack on our peaceful society.'

Home Secretary Theresa May, pictured last night paying her tribute, said Mrs Cox was one of the 'brightest and most popular' MPs and the pain her family and friends are suffering is 'unimaginable'

Home Secretary Theresa May led tributes to Jo Cox last night.

Mrs May - one of the few MPs to have round the clock security because of her role - said the late Batley and Spen MP was the 'brightest' of MPs.

She said: 'Our thoughts and prayers are with them at this terrible time.

'The full details of what happened outside Jo's constituency surgery in Birstall this afternoon are not yet clear and until the facts have been fully established I will not comment further.

'It is entirely appropriate that all campaigning for the referendum has been suspended.

'All of us are united in our deep sadness at the loss of one of our brightest and most popular Westminster colleagues.'

Labour former deputy leader Harriet Harman said: 'Jo's death is an absolute tragedy. She was dynamic and fearless. Elected only a year ago she was a beacon among the new generation of young Labour women MPs. So full of promise for the future, so committed to progressive politics. Jo's politics were always about bringing people together and never about creating divisions.

'She put into practice her belief that politicians must be amongst the people they represent and she was, in every town, village and community in her constituency.

'We were immensely proud of her and are devastated by her loss.

'Her children will now have to grow up without their mother but we will make sure that they know what an amazing, progressive and principled politician their mother was and how much we admired her.'





Former PM Gordon Brown said: 'Our memories will be for ever scarred by this moment. Our hearts will always be hurt at our country's loss.

'Jo Cox was the most vivacious, personable, dynamic and committed friend you could ever have. Whenever you talked to her, the compassion in her eyes and the commitment in her soul shone through. 

'Years of public service advancing the causes she cared passionately about should have been ahead of her.

'Sarah and I were privileged to work with Jo and her husband Brendan over many years and in her tireless efforts on behalf of poor and desolate children and mothers.

'She went to some of the most dangerous places in the world.

'The last place she should have been in danger was in her home town.

'People will say that this does not happen in Britain. This should not happen in Britain. And we must resolve that this will never again happen in Britain.

Boris Johnson's message of condolence was typical of the cross party tributes to the Labour MP. He said it was 'appalling' an MP should lose her life simply doing her job 

International Development Secretary Justine Greening paid tribute to Mrs Cox's work on aid as a former Oxfam chief and advocate in Parliament 

SNP MP Eilidh Whiteford said Mrs Cox had been a 'brilliant, talented woman who could have done anything. She chose to spend it helping other people' 

'My and Sarah's thoughts and prayers are with Brendan and their two young children Cuillin and Lejla this evening. They will have all our support in the difficult days ahead. For them and for those of us who were Jo's friends, this is a devastating day. And it is a devastating blow to our democracy.'

In a statement, former PM Gordon Brown paid tribute to a 'vivacious, personable, dynamic and committed friend' 

Paddy Ashdown, who worked closely with Jo Cox, on campaigns for Syria and refugees said: 'I am terribly shocked and saddened by this news and my thoughts are with her family.

'She was someone with extraordinary courage and a principled campaigner for a more enlightened policy towards refugees. She represented all that is best in our country and our political system.' 

Labour MP Anna Turley said: 'At the moment we just want to think about Jo, think about her family, think about the wonderful, wonderful colleague that we've been privileged to know and to have worked with, who is just a terrific person.

'And I just want to pay tribute to her wonderful life and think of her family at this time.'





John Hannett, general secretary of the shopworkers union Usdaw, said: 'It is truly shocking to hear the news that Jo Cox was murdered on the streets of her constituency. Our thoughts are with Jo's family and friends.

'Usdaw was proud to have nominated Jo as the Labour candidate in Batley and Spen, she was a true friend of the union and a very hardworking MP.

'We, amongst many others, will miss Jo. Her death will send shockwaves throughout the political world and wider community.'

Labour MP Diana Johnson said Mrs Cox had been an 'exceptional colleague' and a 'brilliant campaigner for the voiceless' 

Emma Lewell-Buck said she was 'devastated' at the loss of her friend and colleague

Commons deputy speaker Lindsay Hoyle said Mrs Cox had been a 'rising star from the new intake', admittting she would leave a 'painful void in the House' 

Chief Rabbi Ephraim Mirvis said: 'We're united in grief today at the terrible loss of Jo Cox. Brutally murdered as she served constituents. May her memory be or a blessing.'

Len McCluskey, leader of the Unite union, said: 'This is the most appalling crime. Two young children have lost their mum, Jo's husband has lost his wife and a family has had a deeply loved member taken from them.

'Our deepest condolences go to Jo's husband, their children, her wider family, and to the Labour Party to whom she was very dear.

'Jo was doing what she believed in and was passionate about, standing up for the people and the community she represented.

'We must honour her in the best way possible, to carry on her work of uniting people and never letting division or despair win the day.'

Former Labour leader Ed Miliband said his 'heart breaks' over the news and said 'she was so full of life and joy'

2015 Labour MP Cat Smith said Mrs Cox was a 'lovely person, an outstanding MP and most importantly a loving mother and wife' 

Wes Streeting, another of Labour's 2015 group, said Mrs Cox had been loved by her colleagues and said they were 'heartbroken' 

Labour's Chris Bryant said: 'Some things are incomprehensible. A brilliant, witty, peaceful, caring woman violently taken from her family. Faith feels utterly barren.' 

Tory Sarah Wollaston said: 'Jo Cox was the most lovely person, heartfelt sympathy to her husband her children & the community she devoted herself to.'

Labour's Wes Streeting, another member of the 2015 delegation, said: 'Can't tell you how much Jo is LOVED by her colleagues. We are heartbroken to have lost such a talented, special person and brilliant mum.' 

Former Labour leader Ed Miliband said: 'My heart breaks for the loss of Jo Cox and for Brendan and their kids. She was so full of life and joy. Words feel hopeless right now.' 



Liberal Democrat Alistair Carmichael said: 'Stunned by the news about Jo Cox. Utterly cruel and senseless. All thoughts with her family, friends and colleagues.'

Tory MP Andrea Jenkyns, who represents the neighbouring constituency, said she was 'absolutely devastated' to hear of the death 

Sarah Wollaston, the senior Tory MP, said Mrs Cox was the 'most lovely person' and offered her 'heartfelt sympathy' to the Cox family 

Environment Secretary Liz Truss said the news was 'absolutely terrible' 

George Osborne last night cancelled a major address on the economy and referendum to pay an emotional tribute to Jo Cox.

He said all MPs had been rocked by the ‘appalling, shattering news’ of Mrs Cox’s death when it was confirmed by West Yorkshire Police shortly after 5pm.

But a week before a democratic vote that will define his career, Mr Osborne said 'freedom, liberty and justice' would prevail over the 'hatred that killed her'.

The Chancellor welcomed the decision to suspend campaigning on the EU referendum with less than a week to polling day out of respect for the tragic events in Birstall.

Mr Osborne, speaking at the annual Mansion House diner, said Mrs Cox had died ‘serving her constituents, serving our democracy’.



And Mr Osborne reflected on how all MPs making themselves available to their constituents is ‘one of the virtues of our Parliamentary democracy’.

He said: ‘It’s what makes the way we govern ourselves very different from many others.

'To be an effective representative, all of us who are MPs engage with their communities, talk to everyone and anyone, hold constituency surgeries and must be prepared to stand up and argue publicly for what we believe.

'Jo did all of these things.'

The Chancellor said the Batley and Spen MP had been 'liked and respected across the House' after making an immediate impact since her election last year.

He said shed changed attitudes and helped change Government policy despite being a new, backbench, opposition MP.

Mr Osborne said: ' She will never know how many lives she helped transform.

'Today, doing that job, she senselessly lost her own life.

'Not since Ian Gow lost his life to an IRA bomb twenty six years ago has an MP been murdered, but others since have faced attack, injury and intimidation.'

The Chancellor continued: ' We believe in Parliamentary democracy.

'MPs have the privilege of representing the views of those who voted for them and those who did not. We believe in tolerance.

'In the words of her husband, Brendan, Jo would have wanted us to unite against the hatred that killed her. Hate doesn’t have a creed, race or religion. It is poisonous.

'And we believe in freedom, liberty and justice.'

Mr Osborne said the day's 'horrible events' were an 'assault on all these values'.

But in a defiant conclusion, he said: 'But we know that these values, no matter how they have been challenged in the past, have always prevailed, prevail today and they will always prevail.

'For they are the values of Great Britain, our great democracy.' 



