Tory councillor faces furious backlash after saying he had donated 'steam off my p*ss' to memorial fund for Jo Cox

2016-6-21

Labour MP Jo Cox died after being shot and stabbed on the way to a constituency surgery in Birstall, near Leeds, last week

A Tory councillor is facing demands for his expulsion from the party after making an 'abhorent' jibe about the killing of Jo Cox.

Dominic Peacock, who serves on East Riding of Yorkshire council, made the inappropriate comment in response to a story about £1million being raised in memory of the Labour MP.

Mr Peacock wrote on Facebook: 'I've just donated the steam off my p*ss.'

The Conservative group on the council suspended him, while Vote Leave said he should be kicked out of the party altogether. 

Mrs Cox was shot and stabbed last Thursday as she arrived for a constituency surgery in Birstall near Leeds. 



It was the first time for more than two decade that an MP had been killed, and campaigning in the EU referendum was put on hold by both sides as a mark of respect.

The House of Commons was united in grief yesterday as MPs returned from recess to pay tributes. 

Mr Peacock stressed today that he had deleted the post. 

'I shouldn't have put it on in the first place - I won't make excuses,' he said. 

He posted on a local Vote Leave supporting page: 'I've deleted my offensive comment I shouldn't have put it on in the first place - I won't make excuses.'

East Riding of Yorkshire Councillor Dominic Peacock posted the jibe on Facebook

Stephen Parnaby, the Tory leader of the council, said Mr Peacock had been suspended from the party's group over the 'offensive and inappropriate' remark.

'All people in public life, irrespective of politics, should be united in condemning the fatal and dreadful attack on Jo Cox.

'This is not the time for inappropriate remarks, however intended, and I will not tolerate them in my Group.'

A Conservative Party spokesman added: 'Mr Peacock's comments are highly offensive and he has been suspended from the East Riding of Yorkshire Council Conservative Group with immediate effect.' 

A Vote Leave spokesman said: 'These comments are appalling, abhorrent and we believe that he should be thrown out of the Conservative Party. He is not welcome to campaign with us.' 



Mr Peacock is one of three Tories who represent the Minster and Woodmancy ward, which covers the countryside just north of the city of Hull, on the Conservative-run council.

Mr Peacock later deleted the post and admitted it had been wrong, but has been suspended from the Conservative group on the council

 

