Cameron pleads with voters not to use EU referendum to punish him for 'mistakes' as he fights to move on from migration row

2016-6-21

David Cameron has pleaded with older voters not to punish him for mistakes in government by sending Britain crashing out of the EU.

In a sign of nerves in the Remain campaign, the Prime Minister took to the steps of Downing Street to deliver the appeal.

Trying to draw a line under another torrid spell of pressure over his failure to curb immigration, Mr Cameron argued that the economic case for membership was 'paramount'.

David Cameron made the desperate appeal for voters to support Britain's EU membership outside Downing Street today

The premier said a vote to leave on Thursday would be 'irreversible'. 'I know I haven't got everything right... but of this I am convinced... Britain is better off inside the EU than out on our own.' 

Mr Cameron said he wanted to speak directly to 'my generation and older' to think about their children and grandchildren. 

'I know Europe isn't perfect, believe me I understand and I see those frustrations. I feel them myself,' he said.

'That's why we negotiated and enhanced our special status - out of the euro, keeping our borders, not involved in ever closer union. We have the best of both worlds.

'So as you take this decision, whether to remain or leave, do think about the hopes and dreams of your children and grandchildren. They know their chances to work, to travel, to build the sort of open and successful society they want to live in rests on this outcome.

'And remember, they can't undo the decision we take. If we vote out, that's it. It is irreversible. We will leave Europe for good.

'The next generation will have to live with the consequences far longer than the rest of us.'

On Thursday 'it will just be you in that polling booth', he said, 'taking a decision that will affect your future, your children's future, your grandchildren's future'.

He added: 'Our economic security is paramount. It will be stronger if we stay; if we leave we will put it at risk.

'That is a risk to jobs, a risk to families, a risk to our children's future and there is no going back.' 

The intervention, with just two days left to go until the polls open, came as a former aide claimed that Mr Cameron was told four years ago his immigration target was 'impossible' while Britain is in the EU.

Steve Hilton, the PM's ex-policy guru, said Whitehall officials had given the warning during meetings in 2012.

The civil servants said 'directly and explicitly' that the net migration goal was not deliverable given EU freedom of movement rules.

Despite this, the Prime Minister has repeatedly restated his ambition to hit the target – even including it in his 2015 general election manifesto. At no stage has he succeeded in cutting net migration to below 100,000.

Mr Cameron denied the claims today and insisted that when Mr Hilton left government in 2012 immigration was falling and was close to the target. 

Writing in today's Daily Mail, Mr Hilton recalls the warning to Mr Cameron, saying: 'We were told, directly and explicitly, that it was impossible for the Government to meet its immigration target as long as we remained members of the EU, which of course insists on the free movement of people within it.' 

But Mr Cameron told ITV this morning: 'It's simply not right. Actually when Steve Hilton left Downing Street in 2012, net immigration had actually fallen quite substantially and it got down to 154,000, so not far away from the ambition that I set.

'But look there are good ways of controlling immigration and my welfare break, saying that people who come and work here, have to work here for four years before they get full access to our welfare system, that's a good way, but pulling out of the single market, wrecking our economy, that is a bad way.' 

Mr Hilton told BBC News the PM's statement in Downing Street was 'weird' and designed to move the focus away from immigration.

'It was very interesting actually and rather an amazing thing to hear because what you just saw from the Prime Minister was an admission that they have lost the economic argument, they have lost the argument on immigration and so he has been wheeled out by rather panicky spin doctors, it seems to me, to try and change the subject,' he said, 

Mr Cameron admitted he had not got everything right in government, but stressed that he and every other living politician who had served as Prime Minister thought the UK was stronger in the EU 



