Stop talking Britain down! Bank boss slammed by Boris and Tories for his doom-laden 'phoney forecasts'

2016-6-17

Boris Johnson yesterday accused the Governor of the Bank of England of 'talking Britain down' following yet another doom-laden warning over the risks of Brexit.

His attack on Mark Carney came as four senior Tories – including former party leaders and chancellors – accused the central Bank boss of 'peddling phoney forecasts'.

In a joint letter, Michael Howard, Nigel Lawson, Norman Lamont and Iain Duncan Smith said the Bank and the Treasury were guilty of 'startling dishonesty' for saying cutting ties with Brussels would plunge Britain into a recession.

Boris Johnson accused the Governor of the Bank of England, Mark Carney, of 'talking Britain down'

The attack drew a sharp rebuke from David Cameron, who said it was 'deeply concerning' that senior Conservatives were questioning the independence of the Bank of England. But Mr Johnson yesterday said they were right to criticise Mr Carney, who has been accused of politicising the Bank during the referendum campaign.

Yesterday, the Bank issued a fresh warning that the pound would be hit if Britain leaves the EU. But, speaking before the suspension of campaigning yesterday, Mr Johnson hit back: 'We're obviously going to be hearing Project Fear moving into its final fusillade.

'It has failed to make much of an impact because everyone can remember what the PM said only a few months ago when he said Britain would do very well outside of the EU. The pound is roughly where it has been. It is no lower today than it has been in the last few months.

'I seem to remember the pound fell sharply on the day when I said I was going to support the Leave campaign but we have just seen record employment figures and British exports are doing well.

'We shouldn't be talking this country down. It's a great country and a great economy. I think it will flourish outside the EU.'

In a further attack on the economic credibility of the Remain camp, Mr Johnson joined the 66 Conservative MPs who have attacked George Osborne's threat of a 'punishment Budget'.

David Cameron said it was 'deeply concerning' that senior Conservatives were questioning the independence of the Bank of England. But Mr Johnson yesterday said they were right to

A major poll yesterday revealed a surge in support for Brexit amid a rise in concern over immigration.

In a dramatic turnaround, the Ipsos-Mori poll for the Evening Standard showed the Leave camp up 10 points on 53 per cent. Remain was on 47 per cent.

The survey also found that immigration had replaced the economy as the number one concern of voters on 33 per cent – up five points from last month.

And it revealed that the Project Fear campaign is failing to impress many. Just 17 per cent said they believed the Chancellor's claim that families would be £4,300 worse off if Britain leaves the EU.

A separate Survation poll also found a surge in support for Brexit, with Leave up seven points on 45 per cent and Remain on 42 per cent. Excluding 'don't knows', Leave now leads by 52 to 48.

Elections expert John Curtice said the Remain camp had now lost its position in the race for the first time. He said: 'It may be that the Remain side over-egged the pudding about the potential economic consequences.' 



On the campaign trial in East Anglia yesterday in which he gutted a salmon during a visit to a food company in Lowestoft, the former London mayor described the idea as a 'fantastical proposition'.

He added: 'If it were to appear I would certainly not support it, I would oppose it but I don't think it will.' In a joint letter yesterday, former Tory leaders Lord Howard and Mr Duncan Smith joined former chancellors Lord Lawson and Lord Lamont in criticising the Bank of England and the Treasury for presenting one-sided forecasts about the impact of Brexit.

The joint letter said Mr Carney was guilty of 'startling dishonesty'

They wrote: 'There has been startling dishonesty in the economic debate, with a woeful failure on the part of the Bank of England, the Treasury and other official sources to present a fair and balanced analysis. They have been peddling phoney forecasts and scare stories to back up the attempts of David Cameron and George Osborne to frighten the electorate into voting Remain.'

In a message on Twitter, Mr Cameron responded: 'It's deeply concerning that the Leave campaign is criticising the independent Bank of England. We should listen to experts when they warn us of the dangers to our economy of leaving the European Union.' The row came as Canadian Mr Carney became embroiled in a furious war of words with senior Tory Bernard Jenkin, who accused him of going 'way beyond' his remit in warning that Brexit could spark a 'technical recession'.

Mr Jenkin, a director of the Vote Leave campaign and chairman of the Commons public administration committee, said legal advice made it clear that the Bank of England was not allowed to make political interventions during the final few weeks of the EU referendum campaign.

He said Mr Carney had gone 'way beyond what a Bank governor would normally do in terms of making statements about rate-setting and economic forecasts'. But the Governor hit back, saying Mr Jenkin had a 'fundamental misunderstanding' about the independence of the financial institution. He said the Bank had a 'duty' to publish its economic forecasts.

In a letter to Mr Jenkin, he wrote: 'I have not 'already made my views known about the question in the forthcoming referendum'. Nor do I intend to share my private opinion other than via the anonymity of the ballot box when I join millions of others to cast my vote.

'All of the public comments that I, and other Bank officials, have made regarding issues related to the referendum have been limited to factors that affect the Bank's statutory responsibilities and have been entirely consistent with our remits.

The Bank has a duty to report our evidence-based judgments to Parliament and the public. Indeed that responsibility to provide a high level of transparency is enshrined in our remits.'

A joint letter said the Bank and the Treasury were guilty of 'startling dishonesty' for saying cutting ties with Brussels would plunge Britain into a recession

Switzerland has officially withdrawn its application to join the European Union, saying only 'a few lunatics' now want to become part of the bloc.

The Swiss parliament voted to formally scrap its membership bid, which has been dormant for more than 20 years.

Thomas Minder, an independent MP, said the state wanted to close the issue 'painlessly', adding that only 'a few lunatics' want to join the EU as it is today.

The country's foreign minister Didier Burkhalter said the government would now tell the EU to 'consider [the membership bid] as withdrawn'.

He had earlier claimed the application, which was sent to the European Economic Community in 1992, was invalid.

Switzerland voted in December 1992 not to join the new European Economic Area, and the application was suspended. At the time, becoming part of the EEA was a first step towards full EU membership.

Instead the country, which sells over half of its exports to the EU, struck more than 120 bilateral agreements with Brussels designed to secure access to Europe's markets. The Swiss economy has boomed and been ranked the world's most competitive.

EU leaders yesterday admitted they have begun emergency talks on how they would respond to a Brexit vote.

European Council president Donald Tusk said they would be 'ready' as a surge in support for Britain's Leave campaign makes it 'very difficult to be optimistic'. Earlier this week he warned Brexit could destroy 'Western political civilisation' and that it could take seven years for the UK to officially leave. 



Leading cooks including Nigel Slater yesterday suggested British cuisine would suffer if the country left the EU. Swiss chef Anton Mosimann and food writer Tom Parker Bowles were also among the 59 who said they did not want to return to the time before 'foreign' ingredients, dishes or menus.

In a letter to The Times, they said Britain should remain in the EU to protect the country's 'enhanced food and wine culture and standing in the world food league'.

They also praised the influence of foreign chefs and waiters in British dishes as they urged people to vote to Remain. Their letter read: 'As people...concerned about the cultural, nutritional and environmental effects of our food supply, and especially the quality of our diet, we urge Britons to vote to stay in the EU.' 

Bleak forecast by the Governor of gloom 

The Bank of England yesterday claimed the EU referendum was the 'largest immediate risk' to global financial markets.

In a stark warning, it said it was 'increasingly likely' the pound would fall sharply in value after a vote to leave. The Bank even claimed households were putting off buying cars and houses because they were so nervous about the risks of Brexit.

But the bleak forecasts were immediately dismissed by Eurosceptics amid accusations that the Bank was taking sides in the EU debate.

The Bank of England – led by Governor Mark Carney (pictured) – claimed the EU referendum was the 'largest immediate risk' to global financial markets

The ominous predictions were contained in minutes of the final meeting of the Bank's rate-setting monetary policy committee before next Thursday's referendum. Opting to keep interest rates on hold at 0.5 per cent, officials – led by Governor Mark Carney – used the opportunity to step up their warnings about Brexit.

The Bank said that while consumer spending has been 'solid', it pointed to growing evidence that uncertainty had led households to delay decisions including 'commercial and residential real estate transactions, car purchases and business investment'.

It pointed to data showing new car registrations had fallen in May, with house sales also dropping in April.

However, the Bank quickly conceded that the slight dip in house purchases 'had largely been expected as the surge in activity ahead of the changes in the stamp duty regime unwound'. There was a rush to buy houses before April 1 when the Government increased the fee for second home owners and buy-to-let landlords.

Eurosceptics also pointed to official figures published by the Office for National Statistics earlier this week that showed property prices have continued to accelerate since April.

And although car sales have slowed slightly in the run-up to the referendum, business is still booming. Car sales actually rose 2.5 per cent to 203,585 in the year to May – the highest for that month since 2002, according to the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders. Professor Patrick Minford, a former adviser to Margaret Thatcher who co-chairs the Economists for Brexit group, said: 'The Bank of England is talking down the economy. It has become part of Project Fear and is highly politicised.

'It has bought into the Treasury consensus and is making doom and gloom predictions based on flawed and deceitful assumptions about Brexit which guarantee a bad result.'

John Longworth, the former boss of the British Chambers of Commerce – who was ousted after coming out in favour of Brexit – said the Bank's latest warnings raised fresh questions about its judgment. He said: 'The Bank of England governor is a public servant but is interfering with the political process. One has to wonder what his motivation is.' Mr Longworth added: 'Speculating about what the markets might do is like looking into a crystal ball.'

Eurosceptics also said the assessment was undermined by separate figures from the ONS which indicated that the referendum has not caused households to cut back on spending. In fact retail sales grew by 1.5 per cent in the three months to May, up from 0.9 per cent in the three months to April.

Analyst Scott Bowman, of Capital Economics, said it suggested that referendum uncertainty 'hasn't held back spending on the high street'. Unemployment has also fallen to 5 per cent, its lowest level since 1995. Backbench Tory MP Jacob Rees-Mogg, one of Mr Carney's most vocal critics, said: 'If everyone is worried about Brexit why is unemployment at a record low?'

The nine members of the MPC added a 'vote to leave the EU could materially alter the outlook for output and inflation.' 





