‘We’re putting the band back together’: Scots react to Brexit vote with renewed push for Scottish independence as Sturgeon says vote is now ‘highly likely’ 

2016-6-24

Scots on Twitter have renewed the push for Scottish independence after SNP  leader Nicola Sturgeon today said she could call a new referendum within months.

The First Minister revealed  a second vote in just two years on whether Scotland should leave the United Kingdom in now 'highly likely' after Britain voted to quit the EU.

Two thirds of Scottish voters backed staying in the EU yesterday - but because of a huge revolt in Middle England and Wales the UK decided to cuts its ties with Brussels. 

Ms Sturgeon said the Scottish Government will begin to prepare the legislation required to enable a second independence referendum to take place and said it was 'inconceivable' the UK Government could stop it. 

She said: 'There is no doubt circumstances since 2014 have changed. The option of a second referendum must be on the table and it is on the table'. 

Her intervention has also led to calls by Sinn Fein for a vote on Irish unity because Northern Ireland also backed Remain.



'It's on the table': Nicola Sturgeon (pictured today) has said she will start work immediately to pave the way for a second Scottish independence referendum 

Two thirds of Scottish voters backed staying in the EU yesterday. Now many Scots want a second referendum on Scottish independence following the Brexit vote

All 32 local authorities in Scotland delivered a vote for Remain - Nicola Sturgeon this shows that her country was being pulled out against its will 

While the UK as a whole voted to leave the European Union, Scots overwhelmingly opted to remain, with Ms Sturgeon declaring the result meant there had been a 'significant and material change in the circumstances in which Scotland voted against independence' in 2014.

Many Scots on social media who voted 'No' to the country breaking away from the UK in 2014 say they would change their vote if a new referendum was to be held. 

Ms Sturgeon said: 'As things stand, Scotland faces the prospect of being taken out of the EU against our will. I regard that as democratically unacceptable.'

Speaking at her official residence, Bute House in Edinburgh, she said: 'I intend to take all possible steps and explore all possible options to give effect to how people in Scotland voted - in other words to secure our continuing place in the EU, and in the single market in particular.'

The SNP manifesto for May's Holyrood elections said the Scottish Parliament 'should have the right to hold another referendum if there is a significant and material change in the circumstances that prevailed in 2014, such as Scotland being taken out of the EU against our will'.

To stage a second referendum on Scottish independence Nicola Sturgeon (pictured) must secure agreement from the Westminster Government

To stage a second vote on Scottish independence Nicola Sturgeon would have to secure agreement from the Westminster Government. 

This is because legislating for a referendum is a reserved power - not devolved to the Scottish Parliament.

Without agreement from the UK Government, any vote held on Scottish independence would have no legal effect on the Union. 

The Scottish Government could decide to hold an 'advisory referendum on extending the powers of the Scottish Parliament' but the result could not be enforced. 

Lacking a majority, the SNP would need Green support to get a referendum through.

But Ruth Davidson, the Scottish Tory leader, said a second vote would not be in Scotland’s best interests. 

If Mrs Sturgeon went ahead with an 'advisory' vote, she could use the results as proof of the overwhelming desire for independence and demand the UK Government grant her the right to hold a legally-binding second vote on Scottish independence. 

In reality, despite Alex Salmond insisting the 2014 was a 'once in a lifetime' vote, Scottish voters will almost certainly be given another chance very soon in their lifetimes. 

The fact that all 32 authorities voted in favour of remaining in the EU means Scotland is being taken out of the EU against its will. 

This 'constitutional crisis' - as many have called it - is not going to go away anytime soon.  



Ms Sturgeon said: 'It is, therefore, a statement of the obvious that a second referendum must be on the table, and it is on the table.'

And last night, a key ally of German chancellor Angela Merkel told Scots that they would be welcome to remain in the EU if they left the United Kingdom.

Manfred Weber, leader of the biggest group in the European Parliament, said: ‘On the Scottish level, to go the other way, it is up to them. Europe is open to new member states, that is totally clear. Those who want to stay are welcome in the European Union.’

The invitation is in stark contrast to two years ago, when senior Brussels figures said they would not accept Scotland as a member because they did not want to reward secessionist parts of member states.

All 32 local authority areas north of the border returned a majority for Remain in the EU referendum, with the country voting by 62% to 38% in favour of Remain.

Ms Sturgeon said: 'Unfortunately, of course, yesterday's result in Scotland was not echoed across the whole of the United Kingdom. The UK-wide vote to leave the EU is one that I deeply regret.

'The vote across England and Wales was a rejection of the EU and it was a sign of divergence between Scotland and large parts of the rest of the UK and how we see our place in the rest of the world.'

Furious Scottish nationalists had already pounced on today's historic vote to leave the EU by immediately demanding a second referendum on splitting from the UK. 

The SNP said the UK faces a 'constitutional crisis' after Scotland voted overwhelmingly in favour of staying in the EU but is on course to cut ties with Brussels after the Leave won the overall UK vote.  

All 32 authorities north of the border delivered majority wins for Remain and joined only London and Northern Ireland as areas that did not vote for Brexit. 

Irish republicans have already used the referendum result to call for the reunification of Ireland.

Almost two thirds - 62 per cent - of Scots who voted had backed staying part of the EU, with 38 per cent opting for Brexit. 

After counting had finished in the early hours of this morning, First Minister Nicola Sturgeon said Scotland had delivered an 'unequivocal' vote to stay in Europe and said it was 'clear that the people of Scotland see their future as part of the European Union'. 

It suggests she is already planning a second independence referendum after the SNP manifesto for the Scottish elections last month said they would demand another vote if there is 'significant and material' change in circumstances, such as Scotland being taken out of the EU against its will. 

The passionate pro-union Harry Potter author JK Rowling angrily hit out at David Cameron, accusing him of putting the future of the UK in jeopardy for calling the referendum in the first place.

She wrote: 'Scotland will seek independence now. Cameron's legacy will be breaking up two unions. Neither needed to happen.'

First Minister Nicola Sturgeon (pictured casting her vote yesterday) said Scotland had delivered an 'unequivocal' vote to stay in Europe and said it was 'clear that the people of Scotland see their future as part of the European Union'

Scottish social media users took to Twitter to back a second referendum over Scotland's independence from England following the Leave vote

This morning Ms Sturgeon's predecessor as First Minister Alex Salmond  said he was 'quite certain' Ms Sturgeon would 'implement the manifesto' because England is 'dragging us out the EU'.

He said a second referendum on splitting from the UK should be held within two years so Scotland is not forced out of the EU. 

The process of withdrawing from Brussels will take up to two years from when the UK Government triggers Article 50 of the Lisbon treaty - which sets out the formal arrangements for leaving. 

'From when that starting gun is fired, it's a two-year period,' Mr Salmond said of the withdrawal process. 

Insisting a second independence referendum was justified, he added: 'So whatever that period is - two years, two-and-a-half years, that would have to be the timescale of the next referendum because what you would want to do is remain in the European Union while the rest of the UK moved out.' 

Holyrood External Affairs Secretary Fiona Hylsop warned that a decision by the UK to quit Europe would have 'consequences'.

She told the BBC: 'Scotland clearly and decisively voted to remain part of the European Union, 62 to 38 with an increased turn out form the Scottish Parliament elections barely six weeks ago.

Harry Potter author J.K Rowling angrily hit out at David Cameron this morning, accusing him of putting the future of the union in jeopardy by calling the EU referendum in the first place 

This morning her predecessor Alex Salmond (right) said he was 'quite certain' Nicola Sturgeon (left) would 'implement the manifesto' because England is 'dragging us out the EU'

Many Scots who voted 'No' to Scotland breaking away from the Uk in 2014 say they would change their vote if a new referendum was held

'That sends a strong message, it's quite clear we see a different type of politics in Scotland, a different approach to constitutional affairs.' 

'I think people will be looking very closely at this result and looking at the prospects for Scotland and what is in the best interests of Scotland going forward.

'We're quite clear, the Scottish Government will protect Scotland's interests whatever the circumstances and we intend to do that.'







How the Scottish Government will do that 'will depend on exactly what the result is', Ms Hyslop added.

'But we're very clear, the Scottish people have spoken. Their interests are about maintaining that membership, they are interested in maintaining our relations with Europe. We have to find the means with which we can do that.'

While she said there is 'some way to go in determining the mechanism of doing that', she said: 'Decisions have consequences and if the United Kingdom has made a decision against the interests of the Scottish people that will have consequences.' 





After all the results north of the border were declared, Ms Sturgeon said: 'Scotland has delivered a strong, unequivocal vote to remain in the EU, and I welcome that endorsement of our European status.

'And while the overall result remains to be declared, the vote here makes clear that the people of Scotland see their future as part of the European Union.'

She added: 'Scotland has contributed significantly to the Remain vote across the UK. That reflects the positive campaign the SNP fought, which highlighted the gains and benefits of our EU membership, and people across Scotland have responded to that positive message.

'We await the final UK-wide result, but Scotland has spoken - and spoken decisively.'

A furious Mr Salmond told the BBC: 'Scotland looks like it is going to vote solidly Remain. If there was a Leave vote in England, dragging us out the EU, I'm quite certain Nicola Sturgeon would implement the SNP manifesto.'

