Energy giants given green light to send us even more junk mail: Firms will now share customers' details on a national database

2016-6-24

Families will be bombarded with junk mail after energy firms were given approval to share customers’ details on a national database.

The move is part of reforms to the gas and electricity industry announced yesterday by the Competition and Markets Authority (CMA) after a two-year inquiry.

The changes are supposed to stop suppliers ripping off loyal customers, who were last year overcharged by £2 billion.

Junk mail alert: Critics are concerned customers will be hit with a blizzard of information from 34 suppliers as well as from comparison sites (file picture)

But experts claim the CMA’s final report is a whitewash for customers and accused the watchdog of trying to hide it on the day of the EU referendum result. 

Mark Todd, director of comparison website Energyhelpline, said: ‘The CMA chose to issue their report on the best day to bury bad news in years.’

He said the watchdog had ‘hit a huge reset button on the market taking it back to where it was three years ago’, adding: ‘They have effectively said that many of energy regulator Ofgem’s recent reforms were a waste of time ... They’re acting as if they are embarrassed about their report.’

The CMA’s report said seven in ten customers are on their provider’s most expensive deal, over- paying by up to £330 a year.

The four million customers who have a pre-payment meter, said to be getting the worst deal, will have their bills capped until at least 2020. This is expected to reduce their average bill by £75.

Figures from Energyhelpline show households on a typical standard deal from a Big Six supplier, paying by direct debit spend £1,066 a year. 

A switch to the market’s cheapest one-year fix, with small supplier Iresa, could save them £331, while a Londoner in a high usage home on British Gas’s standard gas and electricity deal, paying quarterly by cheque, could save £537.

The CMA said the best way for households to get a fairer deal is by encouraging them to switch.

From next year those who have not switched in three years will have their details placed on a database accessible to energy firms and price comparison websites.

Figures from Energyhelpline show households on a typical standard deal from a Big Six supplier, paying by direct debit spend £1,066 a year

Critics are concerned customers will be hit with a blizzard of information from 34 suppliers as well as from comparison sites. Customers who do not want their details shared on the database, which will be overseen by Ofgem, will have to opt out.

The CMA has also lifted a ban put in place by Ofgem two years ago on firms offering more than four tariffs. Suppliers will be able to offer as many deals as they like, including exclusive deals for those signing up through comparison sites. This could mean a return to the days of firms offering more than 600 tariffs.

Dale Vince, founder of energy firm Ecotricity, said bombarding customers with marketing material ‘will not suddenly motivate them to switch’, adding: ‘It will just cause more confusion.’

Experts have also warned that the move could see the return of high-pressure doorstep selling, which was banned four years ago after thousands ended up on a worse deal.

And industry insiders are concerned about changes to the rules governing price comparison websites, which earn commission from suppliers in return for promoting their deals.

The websites will no longer have to advertise every tariff, allowing them to hide cheap deals and sell more expensive tariffs they are paid to promote.

But the CMA argues that price comparison websites have a vital part to play in boosting competition and therefore need more access to customer data.

It said Ofgem will put safeguards in place to protect customers.

Dermot Nolan, chief executive of Ofgem, said: ‘The CMA’s final report is an important milestone towards making the market more competitive and fairer.’

