What Brexit means for Australia: From visa changes to more red tape for exporters and the impact on the dollar - how Britain's historic vote to leave the EU affects us

2016-6-24

Australians will find it harder and more expensive to travel, live and invest in Britain as a result of the Brexit Out decision.

The ripples from Britain's all-but-confirmed decision to leave the European Union were already reaching Australian shores less than two hours after polling booths shut.

The faint sniff of an Out vote caused the Australian sharemarket to plunge and by Friday afternoon investors had dumped $50billion worth of stock in anticipation of the decision. 

Scroll down for video 

Britons celebrate as the country's decision to leave the European Union is finalised. The decision had an immediate impact in Australia

Malcolm Turnbull was quick to capitalise the referendum result on Friday: We need a strong, majority, Coalition government to deliver Australians the economic leadership they need and they deserve, in these times of opportunity and of risk''

As Britons came to grips with what the decision meant for their country, Australians were also grappling with how it might change their relationship with Britain.

How Brexit affects Australians' travel with Britain

Australians may be required to apply for extra visas when they visit Britain now that it has separated from the EU.

Tourism expert Dr David Bierman told The Daily Telegraph that a European visa stamp no longer gave visitors the access to Britain they once enjoyed.

He said: 'Traditionally if you've come in through Britain you get automatic entrance to all the EU countries, and the same is true if you land in France and then visit the UK.

'If Brexit does occur, all that will mean is you'll have a special stamp for coming into the UK and another stamp for EU countries.'

The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade said it would not comment on the potential consequences of the decision.

Peter Harris of Barking and Dagenham UKIP, Paul Oakden, National Party Director UKIP, Tariq Sieed, Barking and Hovering branch and Roger Gravett, Regional Organiser London UKIP, celebrate after an historic victory after the EU referendum

Brexit could make it more difficult for Australians to travel to Britain, according to a tourism expert

How Brexit affects Australians' business with Britain

The campaign to remain in the European Union has warned that leaving could make it more difficult for Australian businesses to trade with Britain.

Australia may need to renegotiate particular trade deals and companies may find it more difficult to use Britain as a gateway to Europe.

In trading directly with Europe, they may face barriers and costs they did not before.

On the back of the Brexit decision the Australian stock market immediately plunged by $50billion. Pictured is the drop in the S&P ASX50 index

Australian British Chamber of Commerce chief executive David McCredie said the decision may disrupt trading connections between Australia, Britain and Ireland. 

Some Australian companies are reportedly worried that a vote for Britain to leave the EU could make it more difficult for them to trade in Europe as well.

Shadow assistant treasurer Andrew Leigh said a 'Brexit' would lead Britain to look more inward and force it to renegotiate trade agreements with other countries.

'For Australian companies that use Britain as an entry point to the EU it would also generate disruption,' Dr Leigh said.

How Brexit affects Australia's financial markets

Financial markets are often spooked by uncertainty and Britain leaving the EU has already created turmoil in Australia.

By Friday afternoon investors had dumped $50billion worth of shares on the back of the decision.

Australian businesses could find it harder to trade with Britain and may lose access to other European markets 

The possibility of Britain leaving the EU could create lasting turmoil in the UK and the global financial markets, directly affecting the Australian market (stock photo)

In a worst case scenario it could precipitate another financial crisis, reported The Conversation. 

As Australia is closely linked to offshore markets, the turmoil would have a large impact on domestic trade.

If the markets seize as they did in 2008, big Australian banks would find it difficult to secure offshore funding, share prices would fall and the government may need to step in to back failing businesses.

In this scenario, it would be unlikely that Australia would avoid a recession like it did in 2008-2009.

The Prime Minister and the Treasurer respond to Brexit  

Australia's Prime Minister and Treasurer have sought to calm the growing unease surrounding Britain's departure from the European Union. 

Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said the instability currently seen in financial markets across the globe would be ironed out in the long run.

He said: 'It is important to remember that the Australian economy is strong and resilient and has weathered global shocks before and weathered them well.'

Mr Turnbull said he had no doubt the British government would negotiate a satisfactory departure from the European Union.

'This could take several years, and in the meantime, our relations with the United Kingdom, which are as close as any two nations' relations could be, will continue as positively and intimately as ever,' he said.

Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull has sought to ease tensions over the impacts of Brexit. He said: 'The Australian economy is strong and resilient and has weathered shocks before'

Flights to the UK just became much cheaper for Australian travellers after Britain voted to leave the European Union.

Australian holidaymakers now have the benefit of a much weaker British pound and outbound flights from Australia to UK are currently sitting at unprecedentedly cheap levels. 

Webjet managing director John Guscic told AAP that the Aussie dollar can buy more euros as well as more pounds, so more leisure travellers are expected to head over there for the northern hemisphere's summer.

Flight Centre spokesman Haydn Long said greater buying power would make the UK a lot more attractive to Aussies.

'People get most excited about airfare prices, however this exchange rate benefit would certainly make the UK an even more attractive proposition.'  





Treasurer Scott Morrison also said the impacts of Brexit will smooth out in the long term after a period of short term volatility.

'The advice that we have is that Australia's exposure in these circumstances is very limited,' Mr Morrison told AAP.

He said the key issues were around immigration, national sovereignty and Brexit might impact job availability and the cost of investment in the UK.

There would also be some 'internal GDP effects' in the UK and European Union.

'We will see some short-term volatility ... but the smarter investors are always the cooler heads in these circumstances, and the government has a cool head on these matters.' 

Treasurer Scott Morrison said: 'Australia's exposure in these circumstances is very limited. The government has a cool head on these matters'

Experts are urging Australians to buy British pound now and cash in on the low exchange rate after the currency hit its lowest point in more than thirty years on Friday.

The financial market was turned on its head as the world reacted to Britian's decision to leave the European Union, with currencies fluctuating rapidly throughout the day.  

The Australian Dollar jumped 4.5 per cent against the pound, the highest level since November 2014.  

The Australian dollar is now buying 54 pence, up from 51 pence on Thursday, and just below a 15-month high hit in April. 

Economists say the currency should settle in a week as the markets calm down. 































