PM turns to Chipping Norton chum (and famed diplomat) Jeremy Clarkson to rescue his ailing Remain campaign

2016-6-16

David Cameron tried to kick his flagging referendum campaign into top gear this morning by appearing alongside his old friend Jeremy Clarkson.

Clarkson, together with James May, met the Prime Minister at TV studios in West London where he is making his new motoring show for Amazon.

With just a week left of the referendum campaign, Mr Cameron is staring at the prospect of humiliating defeat as almost all polls show Brexit is ahead.

Clarkson, a controversial figure after his sacking from the BBC last year, surprised many by endorsing the campaign to stay in the European Union.

But he joked today staying inside the EU was one of just three things he and and fellow former Top Gear host May agreed on.

David Cameron shared coffee and croissants with James May, left, and Jeremy Clarkson, right, today as the trio discussed the referendum battle 



Mr Cameron met with the two TV stars at the TV studios they own together with producer Andy Wilman to work on the new project with Amazon 

Clarkson said to the PM: 'It's an extraordinary thing that James and I only agree on three things, which is sandwich spread is delicious, the old Subaru Legacy Outback is a good car and Britain staying in.'

During an informal talk with Mr Cameron over cappuccinos in Stronger In-branded mugs and croissants, Clarkson added: 'I have not, with the greatest of respect, heard one politician say anything that's caused me to change my mind.

'There's huge numbers that don't understand and get confused. Really, it's my gut.'

Clarkson said he felt there were 'compelling' reasons for leaving.

But, he added: 'They're not compelling enough for me to say I want to drive a Morris Oxford, which is what would happen.'

Clarkson has famously insulted many countries - on one occasion getting into hot water for suggesting the first German-built Mini had turn signals that looked like a Nazi salute.

The biggest diplomatic incident triggered by the presenter focused on Argentina when he was accused of driving a car with an offensive number plate.

Despite his frequent gaffes, Clarkson is an enthusiastic European - once hosting an entire TV series dedicated to a driving tour of the continent. 

May said: 'If I'm honest, it's a gut feeling for me as well.

'There are too many people who think we will be alright... but that's just not true.'

Mr Cameron turned up with branded Britain Stronger in Europe mugs to try and reinforce his campaign

The pair discussed the effects of Brexit on the UK car industry and Mr Cameron said manufacturers would face tariffs on exports to the continent in the event of vote to leave.

He said: 'I've spent a lot of time in different car plates in the last few years and if you look at Toyota, Nissan, Jaguar, Ford they are all doing well in Britain.

'They are all expanding, they are all making more, they are all selling more and if we were out - like America was out and with a trade deal like them - they would actually face a tariff on every single car they send to Europe.'

Clarkson added that his fellow presenter Richard Hammond was filming in France for the trio's new Amazon Prime show and was still undecided on how to vote.

'He is a don't know - he does not actually know there's a referendum on,' he joked.

In his previous declaration for Remain, Clarkson said it would be 'better to stay in and try to make the damn thing work properly'.

He wrote in the Sunday Times: 'Britain, on its own, has little influence on the world stage. I think we are all agreed on that.

'But Europe, if it were well run and had cohesive, well thought-out policies, would be a tremendous force for good.'

Mr Cameron and Clarkson live close to each in Oxfordshire and the PM offered support to his friend when he lost his job at the BBC's Top Gear for punching a producer.

Clarkson and May, together with Richard Hammond, are currently working on a new motoring show for the Amazon TV streaming service.

The trio set plans in motion for the new show following Clarkson's sacking and The Grand Tour is due to air later this year.

The third part of the motoring trio, Richard Hammond, was said to be absent filming and completely unaware of the fact the referendum was taking place 

Both Clarkson, left, and May, right, are both firm supporters of the Remain campaign and greeted the PM at the W Chump and Sons TV studios today 

The Prime Minister is due to take his campaign to Gibraltar later today in a further bid to prop up the campaign.

But he arrived to calls from Leave advocate Liam Fox to give a clear signal of support for The Rock whatever the result next week.

Mr Fox said: 'The PM must make clear that whatever the referendum result the UK will fully back the sovereignty and security of Gibraltar.

'The message must be completely unequivocal. 

'The people of Gibraltar are owed nothing less. 

'This is one place where 'Project Fear' would be wholly irresponsible.

'Gibraltar's successful economy is based on tourism, shipping, financial services and online games.

'All would benefit from a free market without the supremacy of EU law and the regulations imposed by Brussels.' 







