It was just unfortunate timing! Nigel Farage insists he DIDN'T pull his 'racist' poster on immigration because it was slammed by all sides but only because the referendum was paused after the killing of Jo Cox

2016-6-20

Nigel Farage today claimed he only withdrew a poster branded 'racist' by critics because of the 'unfortunate timing' of its publication just two hours before the killing of MP Jo Cox.

The Ukip leader repeated his dismissal of cross-party condemnation of the poster, which feature a column of thousands of refugees and migrants trying to walk into Europe through Slovenia. 

Mr Farage today insisted he had published a similar poster in May and said the image - headlined 'breaking point' - was a fair comment on the pressures faced by the 'Schengen' borderless zone on the continent.



The Remain campaign issued cross-party condemnation of the poster within minutes of its publication last Thursday morning and senior Leave campaigner Michael Gove led new criticism yesterday as he admitted it had made him 'shudder'.

But Mr Farage today stood by his defence of the poster - hours after insisting he was himself the 'victim' of hatred.

Nigel Farage, pictured today at the BBC, has played down the row over Ukip's 'Breaking Point' immigration poster insisting was a victim of bad timing and not a real row 

Mr Farage, pictured unveiling his controversial poster on Thursday, today said it had been 'unfortunate timing' but insisted the poster made valid arguments

The Ukip leader told the BBC today: 'I released a very similar poster in the first week of May ahead of the London elections to no comment at all.

'This poster, which shows what happened in Europe within the Schengen zone last year, after Mrs Merkel made one of the most irresponsible policy decisions of modern times - one that didn't just affect Germany but affected the whole of the Schengen zone, which effectively is leading to Schengen breaking up - fences being erected and panic movements of people, and that's what we saw on that poster, people crossing.

'The EU is failing us all, that's the slogan, and the point is there's been too little debate in this referendum about this union that we're a member of. 

Mr Farage said the image was not 'invented' and had been on many front pages last year. 

And he added: 'We planned to run six posters in the last week of the campaign. This poster was designed for the day.

'It was unfortunate timing that within a couple of hours of releasing it, this terrible tragic murder took place, and when we saw that, we immediately withdrew the poster, because we understood that it was a day for everybody to go quiet and be silent.

'Even discussing immigration with some people is deeply offensive. I've been doing this for years - I've been laughed at, I've been ridiculed, I've been condemned, I've been demonised, but the point is this.

'We're members of a political union that is failing, and we get the knock on effects of much of it. The central point of this campaign is we want to control our country, and part of that is controlling our borders.'



Michael Gove told the BBC's Andrew Marr that he 'shuddered' when he saw the Ukip poster on immigration when it was unveiled last week

Chancellor George Osborne joined the chorus of condemnation and said the Ukip poster had 'echoes' of 1930s literature

Justice Secretary Mr Gove yesterday revealed he 'shuddered' when Ukip unveiled an anti-immigration poster featuring refugees just a week before the EU referendum.

Nigel Farage has come under fire for suggesting Britain is at 'breaking point' with a poster of refugees - despite the fact none of them have the right to come to Britain.

The Ukip leader was told today his attack was flawed because Britain was not a member of the Schengen borderless zone in Europe.

The Schengen area includes 22 of the 28 EU countries and means there are no border or passport controls - allowing people to travel between countries without stopping.

But Britain is one of the countries with a specific opt out meaning legal travel across the UK border needs a passport or other form of ID. 

Mr Farage has insisted the poster reflects how the EU is failing all countries in Europe, including Schengen members, not just Britain. 

The Justice Secretary said the poster, branded racist by critics, was the 'wrong thing to do'. 

Mr Osborne, who supports the Remain campaign, also condemned the poster today as having 'echoes' of far right literature from the 1930s.

Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon, Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond and Brexit-backing Labour MP John Mann all slammed the poster in interviews yesterday.



Mr Gove said: 'When I saw that poster, I shuddered. I felt it was the wrong thing to do.

'I must stress, I believe in free speech, I don't want to deny anyone a platform, and when I have had the opportunity to talk about migration during the course of this debate.

'I hope I have been very clear I am pro-migration but the way in which we secure public support for the continued benefits migration brings, the way we secure public support for helping refugees in need is if people feel they can control the numbers overall coming here.'

Chancellor George Osborne, who supports the Remain campaign, also condemned the poster today as having 'echoes' of far right literature from the 1930s.

Mr Farage unveiled the controversial poster on Thursday, exactly a week before the EU referendum but was immediately condemned for the tone

Mr Osborne told ITV's Peston on Sunday: 'I think there is a difference between addressing those concerns [about immigration] in a reasonable way and whipping up concerns, whipping up division, making baseless assertions that millions of people are going to come into the country in the next couple of years from Turkey, or saying that dead bodies are going to wash up on the beaches of Kent – or, indeed, putting up that disgusting and vile poster that Nigel Farage did which had echoes of literature used in the 1930s.

'That is what we should say no to and this referendum vote is a vote on the kind of Britain we want.'

Mr Farage yesterday rejected the charge of stoking up hatred, telling ITV interviewer Robert Peston: 'I think I have been a politician who has been a victim of it, to be honest with you.

'When you challenge the establishment in this country, they come after you, they call you all sorts of things.

'We saw the Chancellor a few minutes ago - despite the fact that overnight he talked about turning down the rhetoric - doing the same thing again.'

Asked if he wished he hadn't unveiled the poster, Mr Farage replied: 'I wish an innocent Member of Parliament hadn't been gunned down on the street.

'That's the point, and frankly had that not happened, I don't think we would have had the kind of row that we've had over it.'

He added: 'There was a big momentum developing right across the country, [then] a tragic death... It's difficult to see where either of the campaigns go.'

Despite his criticism of the Ukip poster, Mr Gove defended the official Vote Leave campaign's claims about immigration and particularly the possibility of Turkey joining the EU 

Mr Farage said: 'That poster reflects the truth of what's going on. We have a new poster coming out tomorrow morning and we'll unveil a new poster for every day.'

Mr Gove defended the claims on immigration made by his own campaign about Turkey, insisting it was not wrong to ensure migrant numbers are controlled.

Interviewed by the BBC's Andrew Marr, Mr Gove was challenged on Vote Leave leaflets which claim Turkey's high birth rate would mean a million more people having the right to come to Britain.

Mr Gove said: 'I think it is important to stress that when we are thinking about the enlargement of the European Union - and it is the official policy of the EU to accelerate Turkey's accession.

'I think the fact that both the British government and the EU want Turkey and other countries to join is clear. The rate and speed at which Turkey will join will depend on a variety of political factors.

'But it is the case that during the course of this year the EU want to accelerate that process and I think that when Turkey is becoming less democratic that is not the right thing to do.'

Mr Gove denied discussion of Turkey's birth rate made him 'queasy' and added: 'I think it is very important when we are talking about migration to take into account numbers overall as well.

'One of the things about numbers is that we benefit from migration if the numbers are controlled.' 



Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn today admitted he did not believe there could be limits placed on free movement in the EU as he claimed the Government was at fault for not giving communities resources to cope 

Scottish first minister and SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon yesterday renewed her criticism of the Ukip poster.

She told Sky News: 'In these last few days I hope we can have a debate that doesn't focus on immigration.

'Yes, people's concerns about immigration need to be addressed, but let's also make the positive case for a world and a Europe where we all have the freedom of travel and the positive case for immigration and the benefits that brings to our economy.

'On that point, the poster that Nigel Farage unveiled last week was vile and racist and I hope he does agree today to withdraw that poster, because that kind of sentiment has no place in a civilised debate.' 





