Oh dear, Kay! Excruciating moment Sky News presenter Burley mistook black former race chief Trevor Phillips for Tottenham MP David Lammy 

2016-6-24

This is the excruciating moment Kay Burley confused two black politicians during the Sky News coverage of the EU referendum.

The presenter was reporting live from a Remain campaign party interviewing senior political correspondent Beth Rigby, when she said she 'spotted a man' in the corner.

Thinking it was Labour Tottenham MP David Lammy, she asked: 'Is that Mr Lammy over there speaking to Mr Green there?'

Scroll down for video 

Sky News presenter Kay Burley, right, was talking to senior political correspondent Beth Rigby when she mistook Sir Trevor Phillips for David Lammy MP 

But Ms Rigby had to correct her saying: 'No, that's Trevor Phillips, I think.'

Her confusion came despite David Lammy being aged 43, 19 years younger than 62-year-old Sir Trevor Phillips, the ex-Equalities and Human Rights Commission chief.

And after she made the gaffe, people on Twitter were quick to point out her mistake, especially as she reportedly then asked Sir Trevor is he is mistaken often.

David Radburn tweeted: 'Kay Burley mistaking Trevor Phillips for David Lammy bad enough, and then she asked him 'do you get that often'? #awkward'

Her confusion came despite David Lammy, left,  being aged 43, 19 years younger than 62-year-old Sir Trevor Phillips, right, the ex-Equalities and Human Rights Commission chief.

People were quick to take to Twitter to point out Miss Burley's gaffe on mistaking the two men 

David Radburn pointed out that Miss Burley then asked Sir Trevor if he is mistaken often 

Simon Thompson wrote: 'Kay Burley just mistook Trevor Phillips for David Lammy. One is half the age of the other!'

Ed Gleave posted: 'OH WOW. Kay Burley just mistook one black man for another... Thought Trevor Phillips was David Lammy. You could not make this stuff up.'

While Ian Brindle tweeted: 'Oops Kay Burley seems to have mistaken Trevor Phillips for David Lammy... They look quite different...

The mistake came after the polls closed in the EU referendum and while counting in the vote was underway. 

Other people also pointed out the Sky News presenter's gaffe with one saying 'you couldn't make this stuff up' 

 

 

