Will your nanny, cleaner or builder have to leave the UK? EU workers fear they may have to leave Britain after Brexit shock

2016-6-24

Eastern European immigrants living in the UK say they fear for their futures after the Brexit shock.

The country's three million non-British EU citizens, many of whom are cooks, cleaners and builders, say they are 'stunned' by the referendum - and may reconsider their plans to stay in Britain.

At Warsaw's Modlin airport in Poland today migrants boarding flights back to London said they are 'scared' by the prospect of Britain out of the EU. 

Shock': NHS Occupational Therapist Agata Farquherson, 30, from Lublin, was among those flying back to Britain from Warsaw's Modlin airport today in the wake of the result. She has lived in London for 10 years and said: 'I am shocked and very disappointed. It's a very bad day'

Shock: Farquherson is among three million non-British EU workers living in the UK, of those 850,000 are Polish. Those visiting family back home said a Brexit is their worst nightmare and facing uncertain futures

Tadeusz Kaminski, 31, from the Polish capital Warsaw but working as a baker in Sunderland since 2011 told Mailonline: 'I am completely shocked. I knew it would be close but I didn't really think Britain would vote out.

'I think it's a very bad idea. I have been living in England for five years. I will have to think very hard about my future now.

'I don't even know if I'll have a future in the UK anymore.

Marta, 34, another Pole visiting family in Warsaw who works for a Brighton-based catering company, told Mailonline: 'This is the worst thing that could happen.

'I am really scared now. I am scared for my family in England. My son goes to school there my husband is Polish and works for the city council. We have our lives there.

'Now I don't know what will happen. Will we be forced to leave?

'I have been in England for four years. We went there for a better life, better money, a better education for our son.

'This vote could destroy all that. That's why I'm afraid.'

NHS Occupational Therapist  Agata Farquherson, 30, originally from Lublin, Poland, but has been living in London for 10 years. 

She told MailOnline: 'I am shocked and very disappointed. I am now worried about the NHS as most of the people who work there are foreigners. If they have to leave it will be catastrophic.

'I don't know how it will affect me personally. I got married last week but I don't have British citizenship. Not yet.

'Perhaps I will try and get it. Some of my Polish friends were applying for it in the lead up to the vote.

'A lot of people are quite afraid of what will happen. They have built their lives in the UK and now what?

'My husband voted remain, but his parents, my in-laws, voted leave. That created some problems.

'I wouldn't say this vote is destroying lives and relationships but it could easily turn in to that.' 



When Poland and many other Eastern European countries joined the EU 12 years ago, some 850,000 Poles jumped at the chance of working in Britain.  

Devastated: Latvian Irina Knazeva, 26, who lives in Hammersmith told MailOnline: 'I thought the result would be to remain, and now that David Cameron has resigned I'm even more heartbroken'



Residency: The Eastern European Advice Centre said it had been flooded by non-Brish EU workers applying for British citizenship and permanent residence documents in the weeks and months before the referendum

Concerns: Of Brexit Tadeusz Kaminski, said: 'It's a very bad idea. I have lived in England for five years. I will have to think hard about my future now. I don't even know if I'll have a future in the UK anymore'

Now London-based Eastern European Advice Centre said it has been flooded by applications for British citizenship and permanent residence documents.

The leave campaign gave unequivocal assurances a new immigration system would not affect the three million non-British EU citizens already in the country. 

Under British law, immigrants who have lived in the UK for more than five years can apply for permanent residency.

The Polish Institute of International Affairs, a Warsaw-based think tank, estimates that still leaves between 120,000 to 400,000 Poles who arrived after 2012.

The rights of those EU citizens living in the UK are not guaranteed and will be part of the negotiation with Europe following Brexit.

Britain already has an Australian-style points system to stop uncontrolled numbers from outside the EEA coming to Britain.

The tier two visa system is the main route for visa applicants and operates on a points system similar to that of Australia with salary, English language fluency and other factors scored.

After five years of continuous residency, visa holders can apply for the permanent right to remain in the country.

Now it is almost certain that non-British citizens who had the right to live and work in the UK will need documentation to prove their rights to stay. 

'Anger': Mother-of-one Gabriela Rydzik, 36, a Pole living in Richmond, west London, said: 'It's devastating for all us Poles. We were hoping for a different result. But now nobody knows what will happen'



Scared: Marta, 34, a Pole visiting family in Warsaw who lives in Brighton, told Mailonline: 'This is the worst thing that could happen. 'I am really scared now. I am scared for my family in England'

Damian, 39, who comes from the Polish city of Lodz but has been working as a factory supervisor in Croydon for eight years said: 'They were whipped into a fever over immigration, as if that was the only issue at stake. 

'People became afraid of us. It's too early to say what I'll do. I'm still stunned by it.

'I'll be in Poland for a week and will see how the situation develops. I don't want to leave Britain. It's my home. But perhaps I'll have no choice other than to leave.'

He added: 'The immigration issue has basically turned us into villains. But what people don't seem to realise is that if you're part of a common market you have free movement of people.

'That's the same for Brits living in Europe too. What's going to happen to all of them living and working in France, Germany, Italy, etc?'

Monika Cyrek, a Polish national who works in a grocery store run by her mother that sells mostly Polish products, said: 'If we're not wanted here, probably a lot of people will leave and try other places.' 

And Romanian Raluca Cioroianu, a farm shop manager in Addlestone, Surrey, said: 'I came here with good intentions, to work, to pay taxes, to improve my knowledge, my culture, and to make a better life.'



Latvian Irina Knazeva, 26, from Hammersmith, west London, I feel heartbroken. I thought the result would be to remain, and now that David Cameron has resigned I'm even more heartbroken. He supported British people in the European Union until the end. 



Fearful: Monika Cyrek, a Polish national who works in a grocery store run by her mother that sells mostly Polish products, said: 'If we're not wanted here, probably a lot of people will leave and try other places'

Proud to be Romanian: Raluca Cioroianu is a farm shop manager in Addlestone. She said: 'I came here with good intentions, to work, to pay taxes, to improve my knowledge, my culture, and to make a better life'

Mother-of-one Gabriela Rydzik, 36, a Pole living in Richmond, west London, is an account manager market for research company. 

She said: 'It's devastating for all us Poles. We were hoping for a different result. But now nobody knows what will happen. 

We hoped that in the modern world we would break down walls not build new ones. But many of us have British citizenship. 

I've been here for thirteen years, and now I have citizenship. I brought my family here and they do too – apart from my mother who helps look after my daughter. Now this is an additional obligation.' 



Cambridge PhD student Joy Muraszko, 26, is half-Polish and half-British. Originally from Warsaw she has been living in Cambridge for three years.

Damian, 39, who comes from the Polish city of Lodz but has been working as a factory supervisor in Croydon for eight years said: 'They were whipped into a fever over immigration, as if that was the only issue at stake'

Unease: The rights of those EU citizens living in the UK, particularly the 400,000 or so Poles who arrived after 2012, are not guaranteed and will be part of the negotiation with Europe following Brexit

She told MailOnline: 'I am very unhappy about the result. It's a disaster. I saw the results coming in last night and when I woke up this morning I just couldn't believe it.

'It will certainly affect me because my PhD is funded by the European Union. I'm thinking about leaving, but I don't know where I would go. It's a very bad day.'

Poland's Foreign Minister Witold Waszczykowski said this morning that Poland would stay a key ally of Britain despite the vote to leave. 

He told Polish Radio: 'Britain was, is and will remain an ally in several areas that have not changed.

'On questions of security, Europe. Britain will remain in NATO, will remain a transatlantic country that links Europe with the United States. Here, as our ally, that will not change.'

He added: 'But of course Britain, leaving the EU, will stop being our ally in a certain concept of the development of the EU because it will no longer take part in decisions.' 

By Ed Wight in Warsaw, Poland, for Mailonline

Hundreds and thousands of Poles could end up applying for full British citizenship following Britain's exit from the EU.

Jakub Krupa, the head of Poles in UK, an umbrella organisation that works with Polish groups in Britain, and the London correspondent for Polish news agency PAP warned that many Polish people who live in the UK could end up staying as they treated Britain as their home.

Mr Krupa told MailOnline: 'I would expect many Poles who have lived here for five-six years or longer to apply for a permanent residence or even a UK citizenship in the following months in a bid to curb the potential risks.

'From what we know, a significant majority of Poles living here think of the UK as their home, and will be willing to stay, unless exposed to a vast number of new life-troubling admin procedures or social hostility towards them they fear of.'

He added: 'I think both the interim Cameron administration and the new Brexit cabinet will have an important task to make sure they [Poles] still feel welcome in the UK, so that they feel convinced about their place in the cosmopolitan vision of post-Brexit Britain as presented by Boris and Michael Gove.

'Surely that would be much appreciated and seen as an important gesture and a good starting point for strong partnership even outside of the EU the historically close relations between both nations (Battle of Britain, Polish Government in Exile etc.).'

Last week, a poll conducted online by The Institute of Market and Social Research from Warsaw (IBRIS in Polish) showed that many Poles in the UK were afraid of Brexit.

The survey, which was carried out between 15 June and 17 June showed that of the 5,878 Poles living in the UK who took part, 61 percent felt uncertain with 10.5 percent saying they were afraid.

When asked where they saw their future, a whopping 83.3 percent said the United Kingdom.

And when asked what would they do if Britain voted out, 47.4 percent said they would 'Want to stay whatever the cost.'

Just 3.0 per cent said they would definitely go back to Poland, while 9.6 percent responded they would migrate to another EU country.

The poll concluded that 'as many as 83% see their future as the Queen's subjects. The percentage of those who would like to return to Poland is minimal (3 per cent).'

It added: 'What's worth noting, potentially limited access to benefit systems does not bother the respondents too much (11.9 per cent).

'Our research also reveals that Poles living in the UK are concerned about a potential increase in negative attitudes towards migrant following a Brexit vote (39.2 per cent). While the feel personally accepted in the UK (72.7 per cent net positive), they feel that Poles as a national group are much less welcome (34.6 per cent).

'Regardless of the result of Thursday's vote, Poles living in the UK feel integrated with the British society and want to stay in the country, thinking of it as their home. Contrary to the media narrative, access to benefits is nowhere close to their key concerns as almost 94 per cent of them are in permanent employment or education.'

