They might be in the middle of a muddy field after a 14-hour traffic jam to get into the site, but even Glastonbury revellers can't escape the referendum 

2016-6-22

They may have sat in 12 hour traffic jams and then waded through knee-deep on their arrival at Worthy Farm - but even Glastonbury revellers appear gripped by the EU referendum. 

Many festival-goers wandered through the world-famous festival site wearing European flags in a show of support for the Remain campaign. 

Gates to the festival opened at 8am and thousands were pictured standing in the road after becoming stranded in snarling queues for up to 12 hours overnight. 

One fan said what was supposed to be a four-hour trip had taken them more a day to complete, while social media users claimed some had even abandoned their vehicles to walk to the site.  

It led Glastonbury organisers to issue a plea this morning urging people planning to arrive by car or camper van to stay away until the jams cleared. 

Festival organiser Emily Eavis later apologised before it was announced that the site had 'opened for business' this afternoon and everyone was welcome again. 





Scroll down for videos

Four festival-goers with European flags ahead of the Referendum walk battle through the mud as they arrive at Glastonbury festival

A reveller clutching a can of beer and wrapped in a European flag walks through the camp site at the festival 

Showing his supporrt: A man with a European Union flag on his back arrives at the festival amid the heavy rain and muddy conditions

A couple wearing European flags smile for the camera as they battled through hour-long queues to arrive at Glastonbury festival 

Becky Biddlecombe, Ashleigh Sweet, Ruby Pomphrey and Ellie Davis, all aged 19, arrive in muddy conditions at Glastonbury Festival

The clouds hover ominously overhead as those who have beat the hours-long queue to arrive make their way across the site

More than 180,000 festival goers are expected to pour in over the rest of the week to see hundreds of acts over the weekend

Happy to be ther: Ella Stolton (left), 21, and  Lydia Owen (right), 20, from London, had mud on their faces at Glastonbury Festival today

Getting stuck: People are forced to push a car through the mud as they arrive at Glastonbury Festival this morning amid the wet weather

Now its 46th year the festival is one largest music festivals in the world and this year features headline acts Muse, Adele and Coldplay

A festival goer relaxes after getting into Glastonbury, which is held at Worthy Farm, in Somerset

Glastonbury Festival tweeted that it was 'not safe' to arrive at the site on foot, after people apparently tried to find alternate routes

Festival-goers recline on a hill as they soak up the sunshine at Worthy Farm, in Pilton - the Pyramid Stage opens on Friday

At 8pm, with many still stuck in traffic, Glastonbury Police tweeted that their 'new plan' to allow people to reach the site was 'starting to work'. Shortly afterwards, the festival's official Twitter account warned people not to start walking because 'it is not safe'.

More than 180,000 festival goers are expected to pour in over the rest of the week to see hundreds of acts including headliners Muse, Adele and Coldplay on the famous Pyramid Stage. 

But many looking to get a head-start endured a nightmare few hours as they became stuck in their vehicles - prompting a warning from organisers.

A statement posted on the festival's Twitter feed this morning said: 'If you are coming to the festival by car or campervan, and have yet to begin your journey, please do not set off.'

Video footage posted to YouTube gives an indication of the scale of the flooding, with water flowing freely through one part of the site. Another video on Twitter showed the huge queues motorists had to endure on their way to Glastonbury.

Sian Stevens, 28 and her son Noel Barker, two, arrive at Glastonbury (pictured left) along with Charlotte Banks (right) and her friends

Tailbacks: People were forced to get out of their vehicles after traffic was brought to a standstill on the A303 on the way to Glastonbury

Queues: Traffic jams could be seen as festival goers arrived in rainy and muddy conditions at Glastonbury in Somerset this morning

Infuriating: One fan, Alexandra Badwi, said what was supposed to be a four-hour journey had taken her more than a day to complete

Egoin installs 'collective custom build' property in Edinburgh

Cruel moment man dumps his dog at the roadside before driving off

Police chief speculates there may not have been a drone at all

Bye Felicia! Hair-larious argument over bus seating arrangements

Teenage Meghan put on scene-stealing performance at Christmas show

Chris Evans thanks fans after final BBC Radio 2 breakfast show

Horrifying CCTV shows hit and run driver plough into young men

Shocking moment out-of-control snow plough hits woman in Russia

Hundreds of people flee amid fears 34-storey building will collapse

Dramatic aerial footage of the Krakatoa eruption in Indonesia

Former Lib Dem leader Paddy Ashdown dies aged 77

Smoke spews out of Krakatoa after eruption reportedly caused tsunami

Putting your foot in it: Festival goers were greeted by bog-like conditions after heavy rain soaked the Glastonbury ground overnight

Stuck in the mud: Two festival goers find it hard going as they push their belongings along the sodden ground at Worthy Farm

People travelling by coach were told not to get off and try to access the site on foot by the festival organisers earlier today



The statement urged anyone who has already set off to 'stop somewhere safe and warm'.

Festival goers have been expressing their frustration on social media site Twitter, with one, Brooke Bromell, posting: 'Worst start to glasto. Been in traffic since 7pm with no end in sight #glastonburytraffic #SortItOut'.

Alexandra Badwi also tweeted about being stuck in the traffic, writing: '20 hours into a 4 hour journey & Gridlock #glastonburytraffic'. She later posted: 'After 21 hrs of a 4hr journey we have arrived at the entrance, now in a holding area (like camper van kettling).'

Another said the queues hadn't moved for 10 hours. 

Frome MP David Warburton tweeted it had 'not been so bad for years' and he would be writing to Mr Eavis as this was 'not good for Somerset'. 

Revellers were already discarding their soggy wellington boots today, as they geared up for four days of music at the world famous festival

Frome MP David Warburton tweeted that he would be writing to Mr Eavis as the traffic jams seen today were 'not good for Somerset'

Making their voices heard: Members of the Shakti Sings Choir sing during a procession from the Stone Circle to The Healing Field





With more rain forecast over the weekend, those attending the festival will have to get used to wading through muddy puddles

Mud, mud, glorious mud: Festival goers arrive at Glastonbury Festival 2016 at Worthy Farm, Pilton, as they make their way through the site

These festival-goers arrived with airbeds to ensure they get a good night's sleep amid the mud during the five-day event

Some festival goers pushed trolleys full of beer and other provisions through the Glastonbury Festival site in Somerset today

Time out: Festival goers relax around a fire at the Stone Circle this morning as Glastonbury 2016 gets under way

Through the mud: Festival goers arrive at the Glastonbury Festival 2016 at Worthy Farm, Pilton

All smiles: These girls came to Glastonbury equipped with camping gear, waterproofs and some cider to keep them going

Heading for the festival: People made their way onto the walkway which protected some of the ground from further damage

Hood up: Festival goer Toni Gregory, 19, from Bristol is clearly pleased to be at Glastonbury Festival 2016 in Somerset

Thumbs up: There were plenty of smiles at Glastonbury Festival today despite the terrible conditions that have greeted festivalgoers

It has also emerged that one fan in his 20s died yesterday after being burned in a horror fire at Glastonbury. The victim is believed to have been set alight in a petrol can accident, according to The Sun.

The bookies' view is not promising for music fans arriving at Worthy Farm this week.

Latest odds from Ladbrokes predict a washout, while the chances of it being hot is unlikely:

He was airlifted to hospital with life-threatening injuries but later died. It has been claimed that rescuers attempting to reach him were hampered by the muddy ground and vehicles blocking roads. 

After battling heavy flooding, traffic jams and a long trudge to the campsite, those arriving today can expect a mostly dry two days to explore the biggest-ever grounds before Glastonbury officially kicks off on Friday morning at 11am.

This year's festival will include its first classical music headliner in a tribute to David Bowie, Jeff Lynne's ELO in the Sunday 'Legends' slot and even a talk from Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn.

Idris Elba fans will be disappointed, however, as he pulled out of his DJ slot just one day ahead of the festival beginning due to scheduling conflicts with his new film The Dark Tower.

In more bad news for campers, the site was already being hailed a mudbath even before thousands of wellies got their chance to churn up the soil, with workers sharing pictures of boggy fields and submerged paths yesterday.

This morning, one major road to the event - the A37 - was closed and the A361 and A303 were clogged.

Richard Lartley, 24, was stuck in traffic from 6am, alongside his friend Charlie Marden, 24.

The pair left their homes in Tooting, London, intending to meet the official bus at Bath, Somerset, and get the coach for the rest of their journey.

But when they arrived 45 minutes late for their coach, because of dire traffic, they discovered it too was delayed, so picked up their tickets and decided to drive the rest of the way. They were stuck around nine miles from the site at around 1pm today. 



Delays: Vehicles are currently queuing from the festival site in Pilton along the A361 to West Pennard. There is also very heavy traffic on the A37 north and south of the junctions with the A361. The traffic is congested south of the A361 to within a few miles of the A303

Frustration: Alexandra Badwi tweeted about being stuck in traffic, writing: '20 hours into a 4 hour journey & Gridlock #glastonburytraffic'. She later posted: 'After 21 hrs of a 4hr journey we have arrived at the entrance, now in a holding area (like camper van kettling)'



Festival goers have been expressing their frustration on Twitter (pictured) after heavy rain brought chaos and traffic jams to Glastonbury

 

Chances of a washout: The picture left shows how close heavy rain is set to come to Worthy Farm tomorrow. The pattern could yet miss the festival. The graphic right shows the rain which is set to sweep across the country from today and into the weekend

Set back: Glastonbury has been hit by chaos before it has even begun after heavy rain brought ten-hour traffic jams - with organisers now ordering people not to drive to the site. Amy James, 21, Daisy Burt, 21, and Holly Marchan, 21, arrive in rainy and muddy conditions today











Grim: Hoods were up and umbrellas out as revellers braved this morning's wet weather to make their way towards the festival's campsite

Hayley Davies (pictured left), from Swindon, and another female reveller (right) are seen arriving in wellies at the Glastonbury Festival today

Helping hand: A spot of teamwork was needed as revellers negotiated the muddy ground at Glastonbury following the rain from last night

Festival goers shelter from the rain wearing wet weather clothing as they queue at 6am outside the gates which are due to open at 8am

Natia Spencer, 20, and Charlotte Winfield, 20, were in a jubilant mood as they arrived in rainy and muddy conditions at Glastonbury Festival

Miserable conditions: Revellers arrive in rainy and muddy conditions at Glastonbury Festival in Somerset today

Teamwork: People are forced to push a car through the mud as they arrive at Glastonbury Festival this morning amid the heavy rain



Hugely popular event: Glastonbury is a five-day festival of contemporary performing arts that takes place near Pilton in Somerset

Mr Lartley, who works in music marketing said: 'The traffic is at a complete stand still and we haven't moved for around 20 minutes at all.

An air ambulance landed at Worthy Farm to take the injured man to hospital

A man has died in hospital after he sustained serious burns at the Glastonbury Festival site.

The victim, aged in his 20s, was airlifted to hospital with life-threatening injuries after a petrol can accident at Worthy Farm yesterday evening.

Mystery surrounds exactly what happened but police said they were not treating the man's death as suspicious.

He was not thought to be working on the site.

A spokesman for Avon and Somerset police said: 'We were called by the fire service after reports of a man on fire at the Glastonbury Festival site at about 5.20pm last night.

'The man suffered serious burns and was taken by air ambulance to Southmead Hospital in Bristol.

'He was transferred to the Queen Elizabeth Hospital in Birmingham, where he sadly later died.

'The man's family have been informed and our thoughts are with them at this time.

'Our enquiries are continuing but we are treating the death as unexplained and do not believe it to be suspicious.'

'The sat nav is being optimistic and saying it will be there in 25 minutes, but I think I know best. It's going to be a lot longer.'

Despite the delays, Mr Lartley remained in good spirits. He added: 'We are feeling OK. It's fine - it's all going to be worth it.

'It's Glastonbury, and we know it is going to be amazing, so just going to have to sit it out.

'We've got a big trolley to take our stuff through the mud to our campsite when we get there, and we are very much looking forward to that first cider.'

Tim Combley, 26, a salesman from Bledlow in Buckinghamshire, said he had been in traffic for close to six hours.

'I've got kids screaming in the back - it's just awful,' he said.

Twitter user Laura Taylor wrote that she had been in the car for six hours while Elly Coles, from Crediton in Devon, said she even resorted to playing games.

'We played frisbee last night whilst we waited,' she said.

'It was amazing fun. Not so much fun setting our tents up in the rain though!'

The Met Office posted a weather update on its Twitter account, saying: 'Further outbreaks of #rain over #Glastonbury this morning, adding to the already very wet ground conditions.'

Wiltshire Police warned people travelling by road to seek an alternative route following a four-car accident on the A303 westbound which has brought traffic to a standstill.

'No serious injuries. Road blocked, seek alternate route,' the force tweeted.

Meanwhile, the full statement posted on the official Glastonbury Twitter feed at 6.35am this morning read: 'The current wet weather and ground conditions are causing heavy traffic congestion around the Glastonbury Festival site.

'If you are coming to the festival by car or campervan/caravan and have yet to begin your journey, please do not set off.

'If you have set off and have yet to reach the site, please stop somewhere safe and warm.' 

It added: 'If you are already queuing to get into the site please bear with us and follow the instructions from the signage and traffic managers. 

'If you are coming to the festival by coach or train, please set off as planned. But please be prepared for your journey to take longer than usual.

'If you are already on the site gates will open as planned. But as always there is no entertainment today. The Festival's entertainment does not begin until Friday.

'We apologise for the inconvenience this will cause but we are doing everything we can to deal with the situation. We will update you regularly.'

Avon and Somerset Police echoed the warning from festival organisers.

A force spokesman said: 'We're strongly advising people to avoid travelling on main roads leading to the Glastonbury Festival site in Pilton due to heavy traffic.

'At the moment, traffic is queuing from the festival site in Pilton along the A361 to West Pennard.

'There's also very heavy traffic on the A37 north and south of the junctions with the A361. The traffic is congested south of the A361 to within a few miles of the A303.

'We're advising people to avoid travelling in this area unless it's absolutely necessary. 

'If you're planning to travel to the festival, please delay your journey until later in the day or avoid coming to the site today altogether.

Careful: Festivalgoers arrive for the Glastonbury at Worthy Farm where heavy rain over a prolonged period has caused muddy fields

Festival goers arrive on the first day of the festival carrying their bags, tents and towing carts or wheelbarrows in muddy conditions

Festivalgoers were already covered in mud before the fun has even begun at Glastonbury Festival in Somerset

Festival goers relax in the Pyramid Field, where the Pyramid Stage can be seen decorated with a sculpture made by sculptor Joe Rush

A Met Office meteorologist said the weather looked likely to clear up and predicted a dry night for festival-goers

A young girl (left) is pushed in a trike pram by her parents as they arrive on the first day of the festival in Somerset

Looking on the bright side: Temperatures today could reach highs of around 19C (66.2F) or 20C (68F)

Headliners this year include Adele, Muse and Coldplay, with reports also suggesting Will Smith may be among the surprise guests

On patrol: A police officer walks around the camp site as festivalgoers arrive for the Glastonbury Festival at the Worthy Farm site

The Met Office said today that further outbreaks of rain over Glastonbury had added to the 'already very wet ground conditions'

Delight: Ella Stolton (left) and  Lydia Owen smiled this afternoon despite the awful weather at Glastonbury Festival so far

Tailbacks: Police said traffic was queuing on the A37, north and south of the A361 junctions, with further congestion around the A303

'If you've already left, then find somewhere to stop and wait until the traffic congestion situation improves.

'A temporary campervan and caravan holding site has been set up at the Bath & West Showground.

'We'd also ask people to stay in their cars if possible, so when traffic starts moving it doesn't cause further delays.' 

AA president Edmund King also warned of 'heavy and widespread congestion' on the roads around the festival site, including severe delays on the A361, A37 and A39. 'We would advise festival-goers not yet on the approaches to Glastonbury to travel later,' he said.

Glastonbury Festival organiser Emily Eavis apologised to festival-goers for traffic delays that have caused havoc on the opening day.

'Wet weather and ground conditions' are causing congestion in surrounding roads and stopping people travelling to the Somerset site.

The first train from London Paddington arrived at Castle Cary station in Somerset as hundreds of people got off ready for Glastonbury

Pictures taken by motorists this morning showed the traffic jams people were forced to sit in as they made their way towards Worthy Farm

Revellers pushed their possessions along in the mud as they arrived in rainy and muddy conditions at Glastonbury Festival this morning

Glastonbury Festival organiser Emily Eavis apologised to festival-goers for traffic delays that have caused havoc on the opening day

Easy does it: Eavis tweeted: 'Traffic is improving. We apologise for the delays and are doing our best to move things along as quickly as possible.' One fan was pictured arriving at the event on crutches

A man  dries his wet socks on the campfire at the Stone Circle (left) while two revellers pose for a photo after arriving at the famous festival

Eavis tweeted: 'Traffic is improving. We apologise for the delays and are doing our best to move things along as quickly as possible.'

An updated statement from the festival said they were 'pleased to report that the picture is improving', but urged those who had yet to set off to 'remain where you are for the time being, please'.

'Because of the reduction in traffic approaching the area, queues are not currently getting worse and traffic is still making it on to the site,' they advised in a Twitter message.

'If you have set off and have yet to reach the site, there is no need to rush. Take your time and stop off. The longer you leave it, the less you will have to queue.'

Festival organisers issued a plea to people travelling by coach, asking them not to get off and try to access the site on foot.

'That is not a safe way to travel,' they said.

Road traffic issues are not the only problems the festival is experiencing. The official Glastonbury website homepage is featuring a temporary holding page message. The only content appearing on the homepage is a Twitter feed, with the latest updates from the police and festival. 



More rain is predicted across the weekend, with Saturday expected to be the wettest of the festival.

Video footage posted to YouTube gives an indication of the scale of the flooding, with water flowing freely through one part of the site

Flooded: A lorry is seen driving through a flooded part of the site as the arrivals continued at Glastonbury in Somerset this morning

Wrapped up: Revellers found different ways to keep warm as they got ready for Glastonbury amid the heavy rain and muddy conditions

Video footage posted to Twitter showed the huge queues motorists had to endure on their way to Glastonbury overnight and this morning

Defiant: Despite having to endure lengthy delays Anna Wing tweeted how she and her party were 'feeling happy' to be getting closer

Others tweeted how they'd been told there was a 7-12 hour delay from eight miles out (left). Hannah Britt lamented not moving much (right)

But the Met Office has told ticket holders that sunglasses will be just as essential packing as wellies as it forecasts the mercury to top 21C (70F) on Thursday and a balmy 19C (66F) over Saturday and Sunday.

Meteorologist Emma Sharples said the weather looked likely to clear up this evening and predicted a dry night for festival goers.

She said temperatures today could still reach highs of around 19C (66.2F) or 20C (68F).

Ms Sharples, who works for the Met Office, said Thursday should be a dry day, followed by a dry start for Friday with showers developing in the middle of the day and afternoon.

'It doesn't look like the showers will be too heavy for the Glastonbury area, but you couldn't rule out heavy ones coming through and then it's a very similar set-up as we go through to Saturday with showers developing,' she said.

'Of course, showers are a bit hit and miss, so it doesn't mean the whole site will see them; parts (of the site) may see showers and parts may remain in sunshine.'

Egoin installs 'collective custom build' property in Edinburgh

Cruel moment man dumps his dog at the roadside before driving off

Police chief speculates there may not have been a drone at all

Bye Felicia! Hair-larious argument over bus seating arrangements

Teenage Meghan put on scene-stealing performance at Christmas show

Chris Evans thanks fans after final BBC Radio 2 breakfast show

Horrifying CCTV shows hit and run driver plough into young men

Shocking moment out-of-control snow plough hits woman in Russia

Hundreds of people flee amid fears 34-storey building will collapse

Dramatic aerial footage of the Krakatoa eruption in Indonesia

Former Lib Dem leader Paddy Ashdown dies aged 77

Smoke spews out of Krakatoa after eruption reportedly caused tsunami

A three-day forecast for the Glastonbury area shows it brightening up tomorrow before more rain hits on the festival's opening day

Offering a wave: Revellers appeared in good spirits despite the conditions, queuing to get into the venue when gates opened at 8am today

Festival goers had their wellies and rain coats on as they arrived for the Glastonbury Festival at the Worthy Farm site in Somerset today

The site was already being hailed a mudbath even before thousands of wellies got their chance to churn up the soil this morning (pictured)

Genius: Revellers found a number of inventive ways not only to keep themselves dry but also to transport their belongings to the campsite

Hard going: It wasn't easy for festival goers arriving at Worthy Farm this morning as they had to haul their possessions through the mud

One girl showed off her 'umbrella hat' as she and her friends posed for a picture shortly after arriving at the Glastonbury site earlier today

Early start: The Glastonbury gates  opened at 8am today and festival goers who had been arriving at the site overnight made their way in

Coming prepared: Carrying tents (pictured left) and dragging along cool boxes (right), revellers arrived at the Glastonbury site earlier today





The festival looks set to end on a high note with Ms Sharples predicting a 'fine, bright day with plenty of sunshine' and temperatures in the low 20s for Sunday.

Meanwhile, police are expected to crack down on legal highs during the festival following the introduction of the new Psychoactive Substances Act that could see dealers face up to seven years in prison.

Avon and Somerset Police warned: 'No matter what you may have heard, we have a zero tolerance policy to illegal substances.

'Security checks on your way into the site are stringent and the festival's security staff are well practised in finding any place you might decide to hide your stash.'

This year's festival will coincide with the EU referendum result, which will be announced on Friday morning.

Glastonbury founder Michael Eavis has expressed his support for the Remain campaign.

Egoin installs 'collective custom build' property in Edinburgh

Cruel moment man dumps his dog at the roadside before driving off

Police chief speculates there may not have been a drone at all

Bye Felicia! Hair-larious argument over bus seating arrangements

Teenage Meghan put on scene-stealing performance at Christmas show

Chris Evans thanks fans after final BBC Radio 2 breakfast show

Horrifying CCTV shows hit and run driver plough into young men

Shocking moment out-of-control snow plough hits woman in Russia

Hundreds of people flee amid fears 34-storey building will collapse

Dramatic aerial footage of the Krakatoa eruption in Indonesia

Former Lib Dem leader Paddy Ashdown dies aged 77

Smoke spews out of Krakatoa after eruption reportedly caused tsunami

Rolling up: Some festival goers pushed their wrapped up belongings along in a wheel barrow as they made their way to the campsite today

Trying to keep warm: Donning their waterproofs and loaded up with backpacks and other belongings, revellers make their way to the site

Benedicte Guezennec and her children Lid and Bjorn arrive at Glastonbury Festival this morning amid the  rain and muddy conditions

Brave: Footage this morning showed the scale of the flooding at some areas of the Worthy Farm site as a van ploughed through the water

