EU to create new border and coastguard force that could be operational in just three months to curb the influx of migrants 

2016-6-22

The European Union has reached agreement to set up a new border and coastguard force that could intervene in front-line countries like Greece and Italy to curb the flow of migrants.

Negotiators for the 28 EU member states and the European Parliament said today they had endorsed a proposal from the European Commission, the bloc's executive, to set up the force over the summer.

The parliament is expected to vote on the issue in a key committee next week and, if it clears that hurdle, it could be endorsed at a full session in Strasbourg next month.

Brussels aims to have the force start operations in September and be fully operational by November.

The new EU border force would focus much of its energy on the Mediterranean where images like this of overcrowded migrant boats capsizing have become all too common

News of the agreement comes on the eve of Britain's referendum on the EU, where the migrant crisis has been a key and controversial issue. 

European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker, the force's main sponsor, said: 'The agreement on the creation of a European Border and Coast Guard shows that Europe is able to act swiftly and resolutely to deal with common challenges.'

In December EU leaders set a June 30 deadline for agreement on the new force, a key part of the bloc's strategy for tackling the flow of the migrants along with a deal with Turkey which was agreed in March.

Comparison: Italy has 600 boats to patrol the country’s 4,700 miles of coast, Greece has 240 vessels monitoring 8,500 miles and Spain has 147 looking after 3,085 miles

Migrants climb into the back of a lorry near Calais in northern France. Many of the migrants arrive first in Greece or Italy but gradually make their way to more affluent areas of northern Europe

Several countries have reintroduced border controls that were eliminated years ago as part of Schengen as the EU deals with a record flow of more than a million migrants and refugees from Africa and the Middle East since the start of 2015.

Under the deal, member states would still manage their borders on a daily basis but could call on emergency support from a pool of at least 1,500 border guards.

The new force represents an expansion of the size and tasks of the existing Frontex border agency, based in Warsaw.

For example, it will have a 'greater role' in returning people deemed economic migrants to their countries of origin, the parliament said.

Artis Pabriks, parliament's lead negotiator on the issue, said the force would 'ensure that the EU external borders are safer and better managed'.

But he warned: 'This is not a silver bullet that can solve the migration crisis that the EU is facing today or fully restore trust in the Schengen area, but it is a very much needed first step.'

