Even Loose Women's been cancelled! Twitter explodes with end-of-the-world memes as UK wakes up to a historic Brexit vote 

2016-6-24

As Britain woke up to news of the historic Brexit vote, disappointed Remain voters were quick to make light of their dismay with  memes on social media.

Twitter users took to the social networking site to share their takes on the UK's decision to quit the European Union.

Many of the images envisage a post-apocalyptic Britain, while others draw inspiration from movies, TV shows and sport. 

Celebrities also joined in on the fun with Hollywood A-lister Billy Zane tweeting his own Brexit-themed message, inspired by the Steven Seagal film Exit Wounds.

The actor mocked up a poster for the cop drama with the head: 'Brexit Wounds'. 



Scroll down for video 











Hilarious responses: Disappointed pro-EU Twitter users shared these memes showing a post-Brexit Britain

Meanwhile thousands of Britons from both sides of the debate tweeted their responses to the stunning victory for the Leave campaign. 

Brexiteers triumphed after stacking up votes across England and Wales - despite massive support for Remain in Scotland and major cities including London.

This morning the Prime Minister, flanked by wife Samantha in Downing Street, announced he would be resigning as a result of the referendum.

He said he had been 'proud' to serve as PM for the past six years, but  it would not be right for him to be the 'captain of the ship' while the UK negotiated its exit from the EU.

After his speech, Mr Cameron travelled to Buckingham Palace to discuss the results with the Queen. 



Ukip leader Nigel Farage has hailed a 'victory for real people' and declared June 23 the country's 'Independence Day'.

The Pound nose-dived to its lowest level against the US dollar for 31 years as traders took fright at the news, and the stock market is likely to be suspended to avoid a crash. 

SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon has already raised the prospect of a second independence referendum in Scotland. 











Disappointed: Dozens of Twitter users created and shared memes capturing the mood of pro-EU voters

But reaction to the vote remained light-hearted on some corners of Twitter, with inventive social media users creating their own memes.

One picture shows cartoon character Spongebob Squarepants standing in the middle of a flaming inferno with a caption reading: 'First images out of Great Britain after the results'.

Another made along a similar line shows Big Ben and the Houses of Parliament under siege from Godzilla, a ghost ship and aerial bombing as pedestrians ask: 'What the hell is going on?'

Loose Women also announced that its usual programming would be disrupted by coverage of Britain's decision to leave the EU, with actor Shane Richie tweeting mischievously 'Every cloud...' 

Some decided to compare England's underwhelming performance at the Euro 2016 tournament so far and particularly singled out Manchester City and Three Lions winger Raheem Sterling.

Making a joke on the financial implications of the Brexit, one poster wrote: Not seen Sterling look this bad since the Russia game...' 





Economic impact: Other memes addressed the widespread implications of the historic vote to leave the EU

The direction of the EU battle started to become clear with a shock result in Sunderland which saw the Out camp win by 61 per cent to 39 per cent. 

Analysis before the referendum had suggested Leave could be on track to win if they were more than six percentage points ahead.

A surprise victory for Brexit in Swansea, where the pro-EU side had been expecting to romp home, signposted a disastrous showing for Remain across Wales. Areas like Carmarthenshire decisively turned their back on Brussels.







Newcastle was less clear cut for the pro-EU side than they had hoped, seeing them sneak home by just 51 per cent to 49 per cent.

Remain had some bright spots, with chunky wins in London, Scotland and Oxford. Wandsworth in particular piled in with a massive 77 per cent in favour of staying.

However, the English cities and Scotland were not enough to offset the will of the rest of the country, and Leave passed the finishing post at 6am. 

 





