Dow closes 610 points down wiping $800 MILLION off the value of US firms after tumultuous day of trading following shocking Brexit vote

2016-6-24

Stocks plunged in the U.S. and worldwide on Friday after Britain voted to leave the European Union. 

The result stunned investors, who reacted by rushing to the safety of gold and U.S. government bonds as they wondered what will come next for Britain, Europe and the global economy.

U.S. stocks gave up all their gains from earlier in the year. The Dow Jones industrial average tumbled 610.32 points, or 3.4 percent, to 17,400.75. 

The drop erased roughly $800 billion in U.S. market value according to the Wilshire 5000 index. 

The Standard & Poor's 500 dropped 75.91 points, or 3.6 percent, to 2,037.41.

Both indexes took their biggest losses since August. 

The Nasdaq composite suffered its biggest loss since mid-2011, down 202.06 points, or 4.1 percent, to 4,707.98. Indexes in Europe and Asia took even larger losses. 



Scroll down for video 

David Cameron, watched by his wife Samantha, announces outside 10 Downing Street that he will be resigning as prime minister. He said it would not be right for him to the 'captain of the ship' as Britain negotiates its exit from the EU

Traders work on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange before the opening bell in New York on Friday

The British vote brought a massive dose of uncertainty to financial markets, something investors loathe. 

Traders responded by dumping riskier assets that appeared to have the most to lose from disruptions in financial flows and trade: banks, technology companies and makers of basic materials. 

More shares were traded than on any day since August 2011, when Standard & Poor's downgraded the credit rating of the U.S. government during a crisis over the budget and the country's debt ceiling





The dramatic sell off knocked an average of $2,700 off the typical 401k retirement fund, ABC News reported.

The turmoil was caused by the shock result of the referendum in the UK; investors had been counting on early polls which showed that the UK was going to stay in the EU.

Instead voters decided to leave the 28 nation bloc, sparking panic on global stock markets.

Luke Hickmore, a fund manager at Aberdeen Asset Management, told the Wall St Journal: ‘I started working in 1987; I’ve not seen markets move this sharply’.

Wall St futures had pointed to a 3.7 per cent loss for the Dow and a 4.9 per cent loss for the S&P 500.

Trading in S&P 500 and Nasdaq futures was halted briefly overnight after they fell more than five per cent, triggering limit thresholds.

Before Wall St had even opened world stocks had seen more than $2 trillion wiped off their value amid falls of up to 10 per cent on stock markets around the world.

Britain was battered and the FTSE 100 fell 8.7 per cent, a fall worse than after the 2008 global financial crash, though it later recovered to 4.9 per cent.

France overtook the UK as the fourth largest economy in the world and Britain’s banks lost $100 billion with giants like Barclays losing more than 30 per cent at one point.

Around the world other stock markets suffered too and Japan’s Nikkei 225 index dropped 7.9 closing below 15,000 in the steepest drop in more than 16 years.

In Europe, the German DAX plunged 7.4 per cent, the broad Stoxx Europe 600 index was down 7.5 per cent and France's CAC 40 slumped 8.8 per cent.

Wall St plunged more than 500 points amid chaos on the markets caused by Britain’s decision to leave the European Union 

A monitor displays the current exchange rate of the Japanese yen against the British pound as a trader works at a foreign exchange brokerage in Tokyo, Japan

Traders from BGC Partners, a global brokerage company in London's Canary Wharf financial centre, wait for European stock markets to open

Analyst Robert Halver (centre) reacts at the Frankfurt Stock Exchange the day after British voted to leave the EU

As the referendum result became clear, the British pound went off a cliff and dropped 10 per cent against the dollar, a 31-year low meaning one dollar was equivalent to £0.73.

The fall was even larger than during the global financial crisis and the turmoil was so severe that the pound was moving two or three cents in the blink of an eye.

The long term consequences for America will take some to emerge.

Diane Swonk, the chief economist at DS Economics said that the UK’s vote meant that the Federal Reserve will not raise interest rates this year.

She told CNN that the Federal Reserve will not want to increase demand for dollars as exporters are already hurting from its high exchange rate.

Fed Chair Janet Yellen said earlier in the week that an exit of Britain from the EU would have ‘significant repercussions’ on the U.S. economic outlook.

Andre Bakhos, managing director at Janlyn Capital LLC in Bernardsville, New Jersey, said: 'The markets are going to trade violently and erratically through the day and it's going to be a challenging equity environment until investors get greater clarity on the matter.'

Citigroup, Bank of America, JPMorgan  and Goldman Sachs slumped by between 6.2 per cent and 7.2 per cent. U.S. banks have large operations in London. 

President Obama had publicly aligned himself with Prime Minister David Cameron in the fight to keep the EU intact, an unusual intervention in another country's politics at the invitation of it's leader of the moment

Trading trends: Gold has topped $1,300 again, but the gain was far steeper if you wanted to buy or sell the precious metal in pounds

The gold price shot above $1,300 on Friday as investors sought refuge from market tumult after the UK's vote to quit the EU.

But the gain was far steeper if you were buying or selling gold with pounds, after the UK currency took a hammering following the Brexit result and fell sharply from $1.50 to $1.38.

The gold price in sterling jumped 20 per cent to more than £1,000 at one point, before settling back to around £940, while the rise in dollar terms was a more modest 3 per cent.

Gold mining stocks also stormed ahead on a day when most shares were mired in the red on London's market, led by Randgold with a 14 per cent gain and Fresnillo which surged 12 per cent in value in early trading.

Many people still hold gold as a store of value and safe haven asset - a hedge against inflation and other financial hazards - despite suffering big losses since its all-time price peak of $1,900 an ounce in 2011.

Gold hit lows not much above £1,000 in summer 2015, but the price staged a partial recovery earlier this year as investors grew nervous about the prospects for global growth and other economic threats, including Brexit.

'Gold rocketed this morning as the shock UK referendum result saw carnage in financial markets, prompting a rush to safe haven assets,' said Ross Norman, boss of bullion broker Sharps Pixley. 







Another consequence of the turmoil is that holidays to the UK will become cheaper thanks to the strong dollar.

Britain is the third most popular destination for Americans with 3.5 million people going there each year.

Low interest rates mean that homeowners will continue to enjoy cheap mortgage rates too.





Prime Minister David Cameron said he would step down by October.

President Barack Obama had publicly aligned himself with Cameron in the fight to keep the EU intact, an unusual intervention in another country's politics at the invitation of its leader of the moment.

The referendum result was as much a smack down of Obama as it was Cameron. Obama warned at a joint news conference with Cameron in April that the UK would be sent to 'the back of the queue' if it voted to leave the 28-nation arrangement and go its own way.

'Maybe some point down the line, there might be a UK-U.S. trade agreement, but it’s not going to happen anytime soon,' Obama said, 'because our focus is in negotiating with a big bloc, the European Union, to get a trade agreement done.'

The US president added: 'The UK is going to be in the back of the queue - not because we don't have a special relationship - but because, given the heavy lift on any trade agreement, us having access to a big market with a lot of countries rather than trying to do piecemeal trade agreements is hugely inefficient.'

Obama justified his toiling with the EU by casting the possible Brexit as a US security matter.

'What happens in Europe is going to have an impact here,' he said at the news conference at No. 10. 

In a statement on Friday morning, President Obama said the U.S. respects the decision of the people of the UK to leave the EU, insisting the special relationship between Washington and London will endure.  

'The United Kingdom and the European Uniion will remain indispensable partners of the United States even as they begin negotiating their ongoing relationship to ensure continued stability, security, and prosperity for Europe, Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the world,' Obama said. 



GOP leaders and presumptive Republican Donald Trump blasted Obama's meddling as 'inappropriate'.

The map shows a starkly divided Britain with Scotland, Northern Ireland and most of London voting to remain in the EU but most of England, and surprisingly Wales too, opting for the exit. Cities with large student populations, like Oxford, Cambridge, Exeter and Norwich, also voted for 'remain'

Donald Trump arrived in Scotland on Friday morning just as the European referendum results were being announced. Trump (pictured, right with a bagpiper at Turnberry golf course) said it was a 'great thing' that British voters had 'taken their country back'





'He came in and really tried to convince people to stay, and I thought it was inappropriate,' said Trump, who threw his lot in with the 'leave' faction. 'And I actually think that his recommendation perhaps caused it to fail.'

At a press conference that officially marked the reopening of his Turnberry golf course in Scotland, Trump promised the country's closest ally that if he succeeds Obama, he'll quickly negotiate a new trade deal with Britain.

'That wouldn't happen with me. They'll always be at the front of the line,' he said in reference to Obama's 'back of the queue' statement.

Trump said: 'They've been great allies. I was very surprised when I heard President Obama say that.' 

He said the British people had 'taken back their country', adding: 'It's a fantastic thing'.

Later, when asked his opinion on Cameron quitting, Trump said: 'Well, that's too bad.'  



Like Obama, Hillary Clinton, had urged Britain to 'remain' in the EU. 

Britain voted 51.9 per cent to 48.1 per cent to leave the EU on Thursday.  

