Queen said to have been asking dinner guests for 'three good reasons' why Britain should be in the EU

2016-6-21

The Queen is said to have been asking dinner guests to give her 'three good reasons' why Britain should be in the EU. 

Royal author Robert Lacey claimed the monarch has been posing the question to those she entertains privately. 

In an article for The Daily Beast website, Mr Lacey wrote: '"Give me three good reasons," she has apparently been asking her dinner companions recently, "why Britain should be part of Europe?"'

A Buckingham Palace spokesman said it would not comment on private conversations.

'The Queen is above politics and acts on the advice of her Government in political matters,' the spokesman said.

Buckingham Palace said it did not comment on private conversations and the Queen was 'above politics'

'The referendum is a matter for the British people to decide.'

Sources pointed out that Mr Lacey did not seem to have heard the question himself, and stressed that there was no claim that the monarch had offered her own views.

The Sun was rebuked by the press regulator in March for suggesting that the Queen favoured leaving the EU.

Asked about the article today, Mr Lacey said: 'The Queen likes a healthy debate around the dinner table. It was just a question.

'She's aware of the complexities for different parts of the UK.

'As we know, she's very careful not to betray whatever her personal opinions may be on this. You can say the same of her husband.' 

The claim has emerged at a crucial time in the EU referendum battle, with just two days to go until the nation votes.

Polls have been showing that the decision is on a knife edge, with all to play for in the final frantic stages of campaigning. 

David Cameron has pleaded with older voters not to punish him for mistakes in government by sending Britain crashing out of the EU.

In a sign of nerves in the Remain campaign, the Prime Minister took to the steps of Downing Street to deliver the appeal.

Trying to draw a line under another torrid spell of pressure over his failure to curb immigration, Mr Cameron argued that the economic case for membership was 'paramount'.  



The premier said a vote to leave on Thursday would be 'irreversible'. 'I know I haven't got everything right... but of this I am convinced... Britain is better off inside the EU than out on our own.' 

Mr Cameron said he wanted to speak directly to 'my generation and older' to think about their children and grandchildren. 

'I know Europe isn't perfect, believe me I understand and I see those frustrations. I feel them myself,' he said.

'That's why we negotiated and enhanced our special status - out of the euro, keeping our borders, not involved in ever closer union. We have the best of both worlds.

'So as you take this decision, whether to remain or leave, do think about the hopes and dreams of your children and grandchildren. They know their chances to work, to travel, to build the sort of open and successful society they want to live in rests on this outcome.

David Cameron pleaded with voters today not to punish him for mistakes in government by sending Britain out of the EU on Thirsday

'And remember, they can't undo the decision we take. If we vote out, that's it. It is irreversible. We will leave Europe for good.

'The next generation will have to live with the consequences far longer than the rest of us.'

On Thursday 'it will just be you in that polling booth', he said, 'taking a decision that will affect your future, your children's future, your grandchildren's future'.

He added: 'Our economic security is paramount. It will be stronger if we stay; if we leave we will put it at risk.

'That is a risk to jobs, a risk to families, a risk to our children's future and there is no going back.' 

 

