Crunch time in Battle of Brexit: From Sunderland to Lancaster - the key milestones that will tell you who is winning the EU referendum

2016-6-23

The EU referendum is a once-in-a-generation battle for the future of our country.

In general elections MPs contest separate constituencies, most of which are 'safe seats' for one or other of the main parties. That means many votes end up being pointless, as individuals have no chance of swinging their local result. But this time round every single ballot will count towards the final tally. 

Academics including Chris Hanretty from the University of East Anglia have analysed how Eurosceptic different parts of the country are - and used the results to produce a guide on how to interpret the early results tonight. For example, Leave should win by more than 6 percentage points in Sunderland if they are on track for victory overall

And with polls suggesting the race is too close to call, where YOU place the cross on that ballot paper could make all the difference.

Pollsters have been scratching their heads trying to work out how to judge who is ahead in the contest.

Thursday 10pm: polls close

Friday 12.30am: Sunderland declares. If If Leave wins by more than six percentage points they could be on track for victory - a slimmer margin would bode well for Remain.

Soon afterwards Newcastle, where the pro-EU side is expected to do well, and Hartlepool, thought to be very Eurosceptic, will announce their results.

2am: The picture will become clearer with a big wave of around 22 authorities due to declare.

Wrexham could be a key indicator of which way Wales is leaning - and who will be popping the champagne later.

We could also get an official estimate for national turnout around now - meaning a 'winning post' can be calculated.

2.30am: A Ukip heartland, Castle Point in Essex, could give Brexiteers a boost.

But Swansea is likely to be more significant for the overall battle.

3.30am: Approaching the halfway point in results, the declaration by the City of Lancaster is set to be a bellwether for the final result.

Edinburgh and other Scottish counts will deliver overwhelming votes for Remain - and crucially signal how high turnout has been in pro-EU strongholds.

4am: This could be the moment the outcome becomes clear. Some 88 local authorities are due to announce their results.

5am: Almost all areas will have reported by now. If it is still too close to call, the margin of victory for either side will probably be tiny.

A number of rural parts of the country declaring later are thought to lean towards Leave. But the outcome could also depend on whether Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn has managed to win over traditional party supporters in seats such as Sefton, in Merseyside. 

7am: The last few stragglers announce figures. Recounts and legal wrangling will loom if we still do not know who has won.

Electoral Commission chief Jenny Watson will announce the total numbers in Manchester.

And as the morning after the long night before begins, Prime Minister David Cameron will emerge from Downing Street to give his response to the verdict of the British people. 



On the face of it, just having two options - Leave or Remain - should make it simpler to take the temperature of the public.

But as the issue splits opinions across party lines, and regional variations are hard to predict, the usual techniques for putting together a representative sample do not work reliably.

For similar reasons, there will not be the kind of exit poll we usually get a general elections - like the one that accurately called the Tory victory in May last year.

But that does not mean we won't have any clue who is on top before the result is declared.

Once the Electoral Commission reveals the total turnout figure in the early hours of Friday, we will be able to calculate an effective 'winning post'. 

The sides will move towards that post as the 382 local authorities - plus Northern Ireland and Gibraltar - report their figures.

The early results will also give us tantalising hints about who is set to be celebrating come 7am, when all the votes are due to have been counted.

Chris Hanretty, a reader in politics at the University of East Anglia, has done some ingenious calculations to create a guide to interpreting the slew of figures.

Hanretty has used data from a huge survey of nearly 30,000 people conducted by the British Election Study team last year to assess how Eurosceptic different parts of the country are.



He adjusted those findings to account for factors such as the overall shift in opinion polls towards Brexit over recent months, and then estimated what outcomes from individual areas would be needed in order to deliver a dead heat - 50-50 - across the country.

According to Hanretty, Leave will have to win by six percentage points in Sunderland - which prides itself on counting quickly - in order to be on track to succeed nationally.

Swindon is seen as so Eurosceptic that the Brexiteers would be expected to come out on top by 59 per cent to 41 per cent there to deliver a wider triumph.

By contrast, the London borough of Wandsworth is considered so EU friendly that Remain should only put the champagne on ice if it racks up more than 69 per cent of votes cast.

In the City of London, Remain should be looking at an even more massive margin - needing to win by around 77 per cent to 23 per cent.

Writing on his blog, Hanretty said: 'If the result in Sunderland is very close, then Remain has probably won. 

'I said that we should expect Leave to be six percentage points ahead in Sunderland. That’s my best estimate of the gap in Sunderland, but it’s come with uncertainty. 

'If, God forbid, the referendum were to be repeated 100 times, then ninety times out of one hundred I’d expect the gap to be between Leave 14 percentage points ahead and Remain one percentage point ahead. 

'That means it’s not impossible that Leave will win whilst losing in Sunderland. But it would be difficult.'

But the best indicators could prove to be towns that are regarded as too close to call. 

Lancaster, which is due to declare around 3.30am, may be a bellwether.

Around half the results will be known by then - and figures from Scotland could give a good picture of how strong turnout has been among EU supporters.

Shortly afterwards, a swathe of around 88 local authorities will supply their figures, and media organisations could start looking to call the contest one way or the other.

If it is not obvious who has triumphed by this point, the margins will be nail-bitingly small.

A number of rural parts of the country declaring later are thought to lean towards Leave. 

But the outcome could also depend on whether Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn has managed to win over traditional party supporters in seats such as Sefton on Merseyside.

The final declarations are due at around 7am, and the chair of the Electoral Commission, Jenny Watson, should make an announcement of the national result in Manchester soon after.

If  the numbers are extremely tight, the spectre of recounts and legal wrangling will loom large - potentially plunging the country into a constitutional crisis.

If the result goes for Brexit, expect to see a shattered David Cameron appear outside 10 Downing Street shortly afterwards to concede defeat.

The Prime Minister will promise to implement the wishes of the British people, but his speech will be necessarily short on detail.

Only semi-independent Greenland has quit the EU before, and that was 30 years ago when the island had a population of just 56,000.

The PM could well hold off on a dramatic announcement about his own future in the immediate aftermath of a Brexit vote - although it is almost impossible that his premiership will be able to survive the defeat for long.

He could fire the starting gun on a Tory leadership contest, which Brexit champion Boris Johnson would almost certainly win.

The Treasury, Bank of England and European Central Bank would activate contingency plans to shore up the currency and inject liquidity to banks to ensure the system keeps working. 

 

 

