Mudlarks! Glastonbury is a real quagmire but that doesn't stop 180,000 party-goers from making the most of the festival fun 

2016-6-23

It may have turned into a boggy mess after days of torrential downpours but that has not deterred 180,000 revellers from getting into the party spirit for the beginning of Glastonbury festival.

Thousands of festival-goers celebrated the end of the rain which had turned the site in Somerset into a quagmire, enjoying the brighter conditions as the storms cleared.

The start of the festival has so far been been blighted by severe queues, causing 12-hour tailbacks on the country roads close to Worthy Farm. 

Elsewhere, festival-goers joined in song to pay tribute to murdered MP Jo Cox. 



Scroll down for video 

Splash! Two young women jump around in the deep mud which was caused by yesterday's rain, as others look on

Deep: The mud did not seem to dry up despite the warmer weather, as it was constantly churned up by guests

Discarded hippy crack cannisters lie on the ground as party-goers got into the festival spirit at Glastonbury 

The sun sets over Glastonbury festival, at Worthy Farm, as more than 100,000 revellers descended on the site for three days of partying 

Dirt: Glastonbury revellers had to struggle with the mud today despite good weather after 180,000 people descended on the site

Cautious: Party-goers made sure to wear wellies to help them make it through the mud

Getting stuck in: Some festival guests were splashing around in the puddles while others walked gingerly through the water

Family affair: A mother with her two young children walking across a field near the Pyramid Stage today

Braving the elements: Glastonbury revellers didn't let the mud get them down today as they walked around the site

Outfit: A reveller put flowers in her hair as she prepared for the four days of fun ahead at Glastonbury

Decoration: Doireann Ni Challanain does the makeup of Helen Curtin in front of a row of colourful tents

Party atmosphere: Revellers were dancing in the paths as they looked forward to the start of Glastonbury proceedings

Drenched: A father and son show how their contrasting footwear has been affected by the mud

Doting: A father drags his buggy through the mud, undeterred by the difficulty of the task

The event had originally been scheduled for Wednesday, which would have been Jo Cox's 42nd birthday, but was pushed back after many were delayed arriving at the site due to heavy traffic.

Singer Billy Bragg led attendees in a solemn version of We Shall Overcome as people spilled around the sides of the packed Park Stage to celebrate her life.

He was joined on stage by festival organiser Emily Eavis, carrying her newborn baby, and more than a hundred women from the crowd who wore sashes in the purple, white and green of the Suffragettes.

A minute's silence was then held for the Labour MP, who was murdered on June 16.

The crowd joined in a march to The Sisterhood, the first women-only venue at the festival, which was officially opened in Ms Cox's memory.

With the tribute event falling on the day of the EU referendum, Bragg told the crowd: 'It's a terrible irony that we are gathered together today on perhaps the most decisive day in the modern history of our country.

'Whatever happens tomorrow, whatever your politics are, tomorrow morning we will have to begin the process of healing in this country.

'We, all of us, must try to live up to the words of Jo Cox, who said whatever the divisions between us, we have much more in common than the things that divide us.

'Tomorrow we must live by those words.'

An aerial view of the sprawling temporary city in Pilton, Somerset, that will see more than 100,000 people attend over the four days

Festival-goers arrive at the festival and make their way past rows of colourful tents at the world-famous venue 

Overview: This image shows the tents located closest to the Glastonbury stages and fairground

Arriving: Those who are already at the festival have rushed to pitch their tents in the most popular places

Almost ready: The scene at the Pyramid Stage, the main stage of the festival where Muse, Adele and Coldplay will perform

Sprawling: Every year the festival brings hundreds of thousands of people to Worthy Farm

Epic scale: The site has gradually filled up with tents over the past two days as people have continued to arrive

Colourful: The area where luxurious tents had been erected in advance showed a bright spectacle to aerial cameras

The late David Bowie's life was also celebrated at the unofficial Glastonbowie, a singalong event which attracted thousands of fans - many dressed as the music legend himself.

In front of the Pyramid Stage, which is decorated with an Aladdin Sane lightening bolt in tribute to the late singer, fans gathered to sing Bowie's hits including Starman, Ziggy Stardust and Suffragette City.

Organizer Miz said: 'I started it a week after he passed away, and it was just to basically deal with my own sorrow. I've been a Bowie fan since I was a teenager myself and when he passed away it just felt like music died.

'I just thought I had to do something to bring some kind of joy to people. For people to keep singing Bowie songs and remembering him.'

A reveller grins for the camera as she reclines on a hammock in Worthy Farm - there was some respite from the miserable weather today

Brave faces: These guests grinned as they picked the way through puddles, their boots caked in mud

Sleepy already? A woman with a blow-up mattress and sunglasses walks through the site with a friend

Two party-goers watch their step as they make their way through the muddy conditions at the festival site

Three festival-goers relax on hammocks as they prepare for the opening of the Pyramid stage tomorrow night 

Gingerly: Revellers had to pay attention to avoid slipping or sinking into the heavy mud

Chilled: Two friends soak up the atmosphere as they attend Britain's biggest music festival



After a welcome dry day, rain is forecast on Friday which will be the first day of musical performances and cultural events.

Despite the improved weather, those on their way to Glastonbury yesterday faced further traffic jams and delays, partly as a result of heavy flooding in the South-East.

Some trains from London to Castle Cary, the nearest station to the festival, were reportedly cancelled in the morning.

The A37 road which leads towards the site was experiencing heavy delays, while the M5 motorway was also congested thanks to an unrelated breakdown.

The West Country managed to avoid the overnight storms and torrential rains which caused flooding across London and other parts of South-East London.  



Helping hand: One festival-goer helps out another after she sank into the mud and could not move

Taking a break: Festival-goers chill out as they wait for festivities to kick off in earnest

Bizarre: There were unusual scenes at the festival as colourful revellers stroked the beard of an older man

Vibrant: Guests wore extravagant clothing despite the deep mud today

Elegant: Some festival-goers did not let the poor conditions disturb their composure and combatted the mud with picnic blankets

Some festival-goers seemed to be surprised that they were unable to cast a vote in the EU referendum because there is no polling station at the site.

One Twitter user sent a message to the festival's official account, saying: 'My son asked how to vote if you are at a festival - My answer is I don't know.'

Glastonbury bosses replied: 'Unfortunately there are no polling stations on site this year.'

Festival founder Michael Eavis, an outspoken supporter of the Remain campaign, has previously urged fans to arrange for a postal or proxy vote to ensure their voices can still be heard.

Some have speculated that the clash of dates could affect the referendum result, by making thousands of young people who would normally lean towards Remain less likely to vote at all.



Tricky: Fans this morning had to navigate the mud in order to put up their tents on the site in Somerset

Bogged down: It was hard to manipulate carts and trolleys as their wheels got stuck in the thick mud

Disaster: A trolley packed with cans of gin and tonic overturned in the mud on the long walk from car park to campsite

Ready for anything: A reveller with a crate full of beer, cider and water transported his supplies to the tents

Overwhelmed: A Glastonbury reveller takes a break while surrounded by boggy mud in the wake of heavy rain

Delighted: Despite the long queues of traffic on the way to the site, revellers appeared happy when they finally got there

Laden: A fan needed a whole wheelbarrow as well as a huge backpack to hold all her belongings

Political: Although there is no referendum polling station at the Glastonbury site, some fans were showing their support for the EU by flying flags

Voyage: Fans in front of the Pyramid Stage shortly after arriving at the Glastonbury stage







Nick Waters, 25, from South London, admitted he was worried that the clash would be detrimental to the Remain campaign.

He said: 'There are a lot of younger people here who are more likely to want to vote In and some of those might not have got round to doing their postal votes, that might have a small impact.'

Non-voters are facing the wrath of other more politically charged - or well-organised - campers.

Friends Ross Parker and Tom Porter, both 27, from Wolverhampton, received a stern telling off from In voters on their coach to the festival.

Mr Porter said: 'I would say the Glastonbury crowd in general, all the people on the coach - because we had a few beers and got into it on the coach - everyone is mainly in. And a lot of people we spoke to gave us a bollocking for not voting In, because we all didn't vote.

'Glastonbury will definitely knock it because there's a lot of people here. I'd feel bad if we're Out - but what put me off is you're voting In, but you don't want to vote for David Cameron either, do you?'

Egoin installs 'collective custom build' property in Edinburgh

Cruel moment man dumps his dog at the roadside before driving off

Police chief speculates there may not have been a drone at all

Teenage Meghan put on scene-stealing performance at Christmas show

Bye Felicia! Hair-larious argument over bus seating arrangements

Chris Evans thanks fans after final BBC Radio 2 breakfast show

Witness recalls moment teenage driver ran down man lying on road

Horrifying CCTV shows hit and run driver plough into young men

Hundreds of people flee amid fears 34-storey building will collapse

Shocking moment out-of-control snow plough hits woman in Russia

Last minute Christmas shoppers queue to park outside supermarket

Dramatic aerial footage of the Krakatoa eruption in Indonesia

Fun: Two Glastonbury party-goers take a selfie as they sit in the stone circle which overlooks the main festival site

Relief: Fans can expect better weather today after torrential downpours turned yesterday into a total washout

Making the most of it: Glastonbury revellers donned wellington boots so they could get around the waterlogged site

Romantic: Two music fans share a tender moment in the stone circle, ahead of the first day of music and cultural events

Ecstatic: Fans sang in the stone circle on Wednesday evening, welcoming the start of the festival



A reveller wanders through the festival site today as the ground was turned into a quagmire  

Festival-goers covered themselves in mud as they embraced the soggy conditions at Worthy Farm 

A festival-goer holds aloft a huge puppet of David Bowie (left) while two women link hands and enjoy the festivites

While Mr Porter did not receive his form in time, Mr Parker admitted he 'forgot' to register for a postal or proxy vote.

Francesca Murray, 25, from Birmingham, was leaving her mother to vote in her place as proxy and said she would 'definitely' be waiting up through the night to hear the result.

She voiced her fear that the Remain campaign could also be affected 'if there's a 100,000 people majority wanting Remain and they're all here'.

Some fans said they were concerned that they would be unable to watch the results as they roll in because there does not appear to be a screen set up for the vote tonight.



David Bowie Fans Neil Atkinson (left) and Joshua Snailes from Cumbria arrive the Glastonbury Festival

Thousands of David Bowie fans have joined together at Glastonbury Festival to celebrate the life of their idol.

Dressed in outlandish outfits and face paint, revellers have gathered in front of the Pyramid Stage for 'Glastonbowie' - a musical tribute to the pop legend.

With the stage decorated with an Aladdin Sane lighting bolt in tribute to the late singer, the event incorporates a quiz and a singalong for fans.  



The organiser of the event, 'Miz', said: 'I started it a week after he passed away and it was just to basically deal with my own sorrow.

'I've been a Bowie fan since I was a teenager myself and when he passed away, it just felt like music died. I was so shocked about it for about a week.

'I always thought I had one more chance to see him live. I saw him in Glastonbury 2000, it's the best moment in my life.

'I just thought I have to do something to try to bring some kind of joy to people. For people to keep singing Bowie songs and remembering him.'

Guitarist Dan Thomas, who will be helping to lead the singalong, volunteered to help the event, which will celebrate Bowie's life.  

He said: 'For me it's a musical influence. I love the songs, I love the way they're written... I wanted to pay my respects in some kind of way and for me if it's worth doing it's worth overdoing.'

Chris Bartlett came with an Aladdin Sane stripe and Blackstar T-Shirt, while his wife Amanda wore a Ziggy Stardust outfit.

Mr Bartlett said: 'We are both big music fans but his music and his albums are a background to my life, really.'

The two said they had raised their five children to know all of Bowie's music.

On the Bowie outfits, Mrs Bartlett added: 'It was just a bit of fun really.

'We are actually quite sensible, but when we get to Glastonbury it's just like stepping out of our world and into another.'

Festival goers participate in a mass David Bowie singalong in the Pyramid Stage field - with many painting their faces and donning wigs in honour of the late singer

With the stage decorated with an Aladdin Sane lighting bolt in tribute to the late singer, the event incorporates a quiz and a singalong for fans



Site: The farm where the festival is held was lit up colourfully yesterday as organisers tried to put the early troubles behind them

Festive: Fireworks lit up the sky over the campsite last night as Glastonbury revellers settled in

Ritual: Some fans paid tribute to the festival's pagan roots by dressing up in outlandish costumes

Surprise! A member of the Shakti Sings choir gets in the spirit of things in the stone circle last night

Posters: A wall at the festival was covered in messages supporting political causes such as banning nuclear weapons

Prospects: Today's weather is set to be better than if was yesterday, although the rain could return on Friday

The first day of the festival saw some of the worst traffic problems in the festival's history as car parking fields became quagmires and accidents caused back-ups on surrounding roads.

Many more ticket-holders are expected to pour into the site on Thursday before the music kicks off on Friday.

Avon and Somerset Police said that they are working on 'a new plan to get traffic moving'.

Those who braved the Glastonbury gridlock will be treated to preview sets from the likes of Kate Tempest and A Guy Called Gerald on Thursday.

The thick mud across the festival site could have a chance to dry on Thursday, as meteorologists have predicted the sun will come out.

The Met Office is forecasting temperatures of up to 21C, with bright and sunny spells.

A festival-goer sick of being trapped in Glastonbury tailbacks decided to make use of the hours sitting in her car by writing a song about trafifc jams

Bea Munro, 23, was stuck along with her boyfriend Jack Dew, 24, after what was supposed to be a 20-minute journey turned into a four-hour epic.

Inspired by her ordeal, she wrote a song about the experience and had her boyfriend film it and put it on Facebook.

Miss Munro, from London, said: 'I thought the queues were never going to end. We only got through it with lots of food, a guitar and high hopes in our hearts.

'Because I'm a musician, I just said, 'Shall we write a song?' then grabbed the guitar and it didn't take me long to write. I just jotted it down on my phone, it took about 15 minutes. We hoped it would cheer a few people up if they saw it. I think it's Glastonbury worthy. Pyramid Tent next year perhaps?'

Egoin installs 'collective custom build' property in Edinburgh

Cruel moment man dumps his dog at the roadside before driving off

Police chief speculates there may not have been a drone at all

Teenage Meghan put on scene-stealing performance at Christmas show

Bye Felicia! Hair-larious argument over bus seating arrangements

Chris Evans thanks fans after final BBC Radio 2 breakfast show

Witness recalls moment teenage driver ran down man lying on road

Horrifying CCTV shows hit and run driver plough into young men

Hundreds of people flee amid fears 34-storey building will collapse

Shocking moment out-of-control snow plough hits woman in Russia

Last minute Christmas shoppers queue to park outside supermarket

Dramatic aerial footage of the Krakatoa eruption in Indonesia

Ditty: Singer Bea Munro wrote a song about Glastonbury while she was stuck in traffic on the way to the festival

The 20-minute journey from their friend's house near the campsite took the couple more than four hours before they discovered a 'secret route' to make their way in to the festival.

Miss Munro said: 'My advice to others stuck in the traffic would be: don't be afraid to take the diversion and make sure you ignore road signs!'

The lyrics to her song go: are: 'Wake up Wednesday morning and it's only 5am, last shower for a week, and you make some scrambled eggs.

'We thought we were invincible, had it all planned out in our heads, but the traffic's oh so miserable and there's no light up ahead.

'On our way to G-L-A-S-T-O-N-B-U-R-Y in the T-R-A-double F-I-C J-A-M, oh why.'

