Cameron on the brink: PM is urged to quit 'immediately' after humiliating EU defeat as he prepares to make statement at 8am

2016-6-23

On his way out? David Cameron's future as Prime Minister appears to be under threat today as Britain backed a Brexit

David Cameron is on the brink today as Britain heads for  Brexit.

Ukip leader Nigel Farage said the Prime Minister should now quit 'immediately' after the UK failed to back his Remain campaign. 

Critics said today that Mr Cameron's authority had 'drained away' after he failed to persuade the country to back continued membership of the EU.

The Prime Minister is going to speak in Downing Street at around 7am this morning where he will discuss his future.  

Prominent referendum opponents within his own party however, including Boris Johnson and Michael Gove, were among 84 Tory MPs who signed a letter backing him to stay in Number 10.

'We believe whatever the British people decide you have both a mandate and a duty to continue leading the nation implementing our policies,' they wrote.

Others, such as ex-cabinet ministers Iain Duncan Smith and Owen Paterson did not sign the letter but stated their support.

George Osborne's future as Chancellor is also under threat with with Leave campaigners calling for one of its leadership team to replace him.

There are calls for Michael Gove to take over from Mr Osborne to lead negotiations for Britain to cut its ties with Brussels, which is expected to last around two years. 



Former defence secretary Liam Fox said that while he was increasingly confident of a victory for Leave, he did not believe the PM should quit.

'What we now need to do is to provide some calmness and reassure people and that requires us to have political stability,' he told Sky News.

'As the Prime Minister who gave us the referendum, he is best placed to see us through.

'He has said he is not going to stand again at the next general election so I think it is fair enough that he takes us through this next period.'

What next? As dawn breaks over Downing Street today there is great uncertainty about the futire of the man inside

Replacement? George Osborne's position is also said to be in jeopardy with Michael Gove being suggested as the next Chancellor

Long-standing Eurosceptic John Redwood said Tory MPs should wait to see whether the Prime Minister was ready to implement the public will expressed in the referendum.

Ukip leader Nigel Farage said the Prime Minister should now quit 'immediately' after the UK failed to back his Remain campaign

Mr Redwood told Sky News that Mr Cameron would have to 'build a new Government that binds together the party' in the wake of the referendum battle', adding: 'There's a lot of talent on the Leave side and he needs to harness that to bring the country together.'

The effort to show a united front comes at the end of a sometimes brutal campaign that saw deep Tory divisions over Europe lead to highly-personalised 'blue-on-blue' attacks.

Signatories to the letter included all of the Cabinet-level ministers who broke ranks to join Vote Leave: Mr Gove, Chris Grayling, John Whittingdale, Theresa Villiers and Priti Patel.

Mr Duncan Smith said he was sure the party would reunite despite the bruising contest.

The former party leader, who dramatically quit as work and pensions secretary in March with a blast at Government welfare policy, said: 'Families break apart for things like this for a while and they will take chunks out of each other but they come back together.

'The Conservative Party has an instinct ultimately I sense that once the argument is over they will want to be back. We are in government, we have to get on with government whatever happens.'  

Ms Patel said on Twitter: 'The Conservative Party has delivered the referendum. Now back to working with colleagues to deliver the reforms we pledged in our manifesto.' 

Rival: Many had believed that Boris Johnson could launch his own leadership campaign but he has signed a letter calling for the PM to stay in his job 



Former Tory leadership challenger and Brexiteer David Davis told the Press Association he does not agree with Mr Farage's call for Mr Cameron to resign.

He said: 'No I don't. There's a very simple point here. We have a major negotiation to undertake.

'I imagine the Prime Minister will appoint some people to carry out the negotiation who both believe in it and who are capable of doing it and once he has done that what we need is stability at home.

'We don't need more disruption.

'Mr Farage is the leader of Ukip, he's not anything in the Tory party and it's our decision.'

Mr Davis said he believes Mr Cameron will remain in post 'for the next few years'. 



Don't go Dave! More than 80 of the Brexit Tory rebels - including Boris and Gove - write to the PM and ask him to stay on after the referendum

More than 80 Brexit rebels in David Cameron's Tory party tonight sent a letter to Downing Street urging him to stay on as PM.

With Mr Cameron's Remain campaign appearing on course for victory in the referendum, the group led by Boris Johnson and Michael Gove reached out an olive branch.

The intention of the letter - made public as soon as polls closed in the referendum - is to begin the process of healing wounds in the Tory Party.

Tory MP Robert Syms revealed the letter on Twitter tonight - and even joked that none of the 84 Conservative MPs who signed up had done so in pencil - which had been circulated among Tory MPs 

Some 84 Tories signed the letter to tell Mr Cameron: 'We believe whatever the British people decide you have both a mandate and a duty to continue leading the nation implementing our policies.'

As well as Mr Johnson and Mr Gove, the signatories included Cabinet-level Brexit backers Chris Grayling and John Whittingdale, but not Iain Duncan Smith, who quit as work and pensions secretary shortly before the referendum.

Tory MP Robert Syms said that two-thirds of Conservative MPs who broke with the PM to back Leave had signed the letter, but said it had not been possible to reach all of them to ask them to sign.

Long-standing Eurosceptic John Redwood said Tory MPs should wait to see whether the Prime Minister was ready to implement the public will expressed in the referendum.

Mr Redwood told Sky News that Mr Cameron would have to 'build a new Government that binds together the party' in the wake of the referendum battle', adding: 'There's a lot of talent on the Leave side and he needs to harness that to bring the country together.'

Mr Grayling said it would be an 'absolute nonsense' for Mr Cameron to lose his job given that he won an election just over a year ago promising to hold a referendum.

'It would be an absolute nonsense if David Cameron felt, having given the country that choice, if they take the decision he couldn't carry on the job,' he told Sky News.

'We are completely behind him staying, we want him to stay and that letter is a statement of commitment to his leadership.'

If Mr Cameron secures a comfortable win, he will be under less pressure to carry out an immediate 'reconciliation reshuffle' promoting leading Brexiteers.

But even before the result was known, rebel MPs claimed they were close to gathering the 50 names needed to spark a formal vote of no confidence in the Tory leader.

One MP, who signed such a letter dated today, said: 'If it's a vote to leave then the PM will have to resign immediately – there will be civil war if he tries to cling on, even for a day.

But Labour's Jonathan Ashworth said that the letter could not 'unsay' the comments of Tory MPs who have spent the last few weeks attacking the PM.

'This letter exposes the reality that David Cameron and the Conservative Party are now utterly preoccupied with leadership infighting rather than the future of the country,' said Mr Ashworth.

'What's more this letter cannot unsay what senior Tory politicians have been telling us for weeks - that the British people simply cannot trust David Cameron.

'The truth is this is a desperately weak and divided Government unable to provide the leadership the country needs.'

David Cameron, pictured with wife Samantha at the polling station today, has been urged by 84 of the party's Brexit rebels to stay on after the referendum 

Mr Duncan Smith said he was sure the party would reunite despite the bruising contest.

The former party leader, who dramatically quit as work and pensions secretary in March with a blast at Government welfare policy, said he made no apologies for the tone of the campaign.

He told the BBC his suggestions Chancellor George Osborne lied to the public - by comparing him to Pinocchio - were 'a bit of fun'.

'Passions are high and I don't make any bones about it: when you are dealing with an issue as big as this - nothing matters more really at the end of the day - then it gets really tense.

'Families break apart for things like this for a while and they will take chunks out of each other but they come back together.

'The Conservative Party has an instinct ultimately I sense that once the argument is over they will want to be back. We are in government, we have to get on with government whatever happens.' 

Tory MP Robert Syms tonight published a letter calling for David Cameron to stay on as Prime Minister and Tory leader after the referendum 

Dear Prime Minister,

We, who are supporters of Vote Leave and Members of the Conservative Parliamentary Party, thank you for giving the people a choice of their destiny on 23 June, 2016. We believe whatever the British people decide, you have both a mandate and a duty to continue leading the nation implementing our 2015 manifesto. 

 



Stuart Andrew 

Nigel Adams

Lucy Allan

David Amess 

Richard Bacon 

Henry Bellingham

Bob Blackman

Crispin Blunt

Julian Brazier

Conor Burns

David Burrowes 

Maria Caulfield

James Cleverly

Geoffrey Clifton-Brown 

Chris Davies

James Davies

Mims Davies

Philip Davies 

Steve Double 

James Duddridge

George Eustice

Nigel Evans

Michael Fabricant

Suella Fernandes

Liam Fox

Mark Francois

Richard Fuller

Marcus Fysh









Nus Ghani 

Zac Goldsmith

Michael Gove

Chris Grayling

Chris Green

Rebecca Harris

John Hayes

Chris Heaton-Harris 

Gordon Henderson

Gerald Howarth 

Ranil Jayawardena

Andrea Jenkyns 

Boris Johnson

Gareth Johnson

Greg Knight

Andrea Leadsom 

Edward Leigh

Jack Lopresti

Karen Lumley

Craig Mackinlay 

Kit Malthouse

Scott Mann

Paul Maynard

Jason McCartney 

Nigel Mills

Penny Mordaunt

Sheryl Murray 

Andrew Murrison

David Nuttall

Priti Patel 

Mike Penning

Andrew Percy 

Stephen Phillips

Will Quince 

Dominic Raab 

Jacob Rees-Mogg

Paul Scully 

Henry Smith

Royston Smith 

Andrew Stephenson 

Iain Stewart 

Julian Sturdy 

Rishi Sunak 

Desmond Swayne

Robert Syms 

Derek Thomas

Michael Tomlinson 

Anne-Marie Trevelyan 

Martin Vickers 

Theresa Villiers

Charles Walker

James Wharton 

John Whittingdale

Mike Wood

William Wragg

Nadhim Zahawi 

Total: 84





'So where is David Cameron anyway?' Voters call out PM amid deafening silence from Remain leaders on the brink of Brexit

As the UK looked set to vote for a Brexit in the historic EU referendum, David Cameron and leaders of the Remain campaign remained conspicuously silent.

While key players in the Leave campaign spoke to supporters and broadcasters through the night, the Prime Minister, Jeremy Corbyn and George Osborne were nowhere to be seen. 

Ukip leader Nigel Farage gave a number of television speeches and interviews, declaring Britain as being on the brink of independence shortly after 4am.

Laying low: David Cameron was seen leaving a polling station with his wife Samantha on Thursday



Questions: Voters took to Twitter to ask why the Prime Minister was missing from Remain events overnight

The Prime Minister was seen leaving a polling station with his wife Samantha early on Thursday, but he did not appear publicly at any of the Remain parties being held across the country.



Voters took to Twitter to call out the Prime Minister, asking where he was 'on such an important night in history'.

 

Another asked: 'Where IS Jeremy Corbyn? Where IS David Cameron. Have they both fled the country.' 

Projections showed the Brexit campaign was set to prevail in the historic referendum despite massive support for Remain in London and Scotland.

Speaking out: Meanwhile Nigel Farage appeared at a number of events in support of the Leave campaign



Deafening silence: Jeremy Corbyn, David Cameron and George Osborne have all failed to appear overnight

The direction of the battle started to become clear with a shock result in Sunderland which saw Leave win by 61 per cent to 39 per cent.

A surprise victory for Brexit in Swansea, where the pro-EU side had been expecting to romp home, was then followed by a series of other strong showings.

With around a quarter of the declarations in, analysts and betting markets are now forecasting that the Leave campaign will come out on top.

The Pound - which soared in value earlier after Mr Farage admitted he thought Brexit had lost - has nose-dived against US dollar by more than 10 cents. 

 

 

