Australians stranded overseas as Commonwealth Bank suspends foreign exchange of British pounds following Brexit

2016-6-24

Australians have been stranded overseas with no access to money as the Commonwealth Bank suspended foreign exchange of British pounds following Britain's decision to leave the EU.

The Commonwealth Bank confirmed  they temporarily suspended the exchange of British pounds and any other exchanges not involving Australian dollars.

'Due to recent results from the British exit referendum we are temporarily suspending all foreign exchange of GBP pounds and transactions that do not include AUD until further notice.' 

Scroll down for video 

The Commonwealth Bank confirmed they temporarily suspended the exchange of British pounds and any other exchanges not involving Australian dollars

The Commonwealth Bank's decision following Britain's decision to leave the European Union

The suspension lasted for an estimated six hours before a spokesman confirmed to Daily Mail Australia that services were back to normal.

'The temporary suspension to retail foreign exchange transactions this evening was lifted as of midnight Sydney time (on Friday, 24 June 2016). 

'All retail foreign exchange channels including international money transfers, travel money card and foreign currency accounts are operating as normal. We thank our customers for their patience.' 

During the outage however, Australians around the world were left unable to use cards or access cash.   

'It would be nice if someone told us what is happening with travel money cards. The thing is useless it might as well be a bookmark. Some of us rely on this to draw our income weekly to live overseas,' wrote disgruntled customer Josh Dzarir. 

Another posted to Twitter: 'Got my first #Brexit shock: #commonwealthbank blocked loading of all currencies for travel money cards, can't say how long freeze will last.'   

With just $10 to cover her weekend expenses, another customer tweeted: 'Surely you have some duty of care to customers who have informed you that they are overseas. This beyond stressful for us.' 









Australians across the globe have taken to social media to express their frustrations at the bank's actions as many are unable access to cash

The Commbank freeze on exchanging currencies has not been applied to trades for commercial and business purposes

The bank has originally told customers that they would have to until Monday June 27 to be updated on the issue

