Jeremy Clarkson and James May finally agree on something: Staying in the EU (but only because it would make it harder to film their Grand Tour motoring show)  

2016-6-20

Jeremy Clarkson and James May have made a bizarre film urging voters to stay in the EU because leaving would make it much harder to film their motoring shows.

Standing in front of a map of Europe, they warn that European countries outside the EU, such as Switzerland, are a 'waste of time,' explaining to viewers that they don't film in the country because of custom duties.

The short YouTube video showed the pair, who are filming for their new Amazon show The Grand Tour, attempting to put on a united front despite being known for their argumentative relationship. 

Scroll down for video 

Jeremy Clarkson and James May (pictured at the studio for their new Amazon motoring show Grand Tour on Thursday) have made a bizarre film urging voters to stay in the EU because leaving would make it much harder to film their motoring shows

They warned that European countries outside the EU, such as Switzerland, were a 'waste of time,' revealing to viewers that they don't film in the country because of custom duties

Clarkson and May said they were 'fond' of Europe and staying in the EU was one of few issues they agree on - along with the views that the Ford Mondeo is a good car and 'sandwich spread is delicious'.   



'It's annoys me actually, I'll be honest, because I want to remain in Europe but that means agreeing with him,' Clarkson explains, motioning to his colleague. 

May says: 'This is very uncharacteristic - we have to put aside the normal policy of our TV show and our relationship and agree on something apart from that the Ford Mondeo is a good car.' 



Clarkson interrupts to add: 'And that sandwich spread is delicious.'

'We agree on sandwich spread, Ford Mondeo - the old Ford Mondeo, that is -  and Europe, that's it. Those are the only things we agree on, nothing else,' Clarkson says.

Jeremy Clarkson (right) and James May (left) said they were 'fond' of Europe and staying in the EU was one of few issues they agree on - along with the views that the Ford Mondeo is a good car and 'sandwich spread is delicious'

David Cameron (middle) visited James May (left) and Jeremy Clarkson (right) at their TV studios in West London, where they are filming their new motoring show Grand Tour 

Explaining why they want Britain to stay in the EU, Clarkson says: 'But we do want to stay part of this - quite apart from anything else making our TV show, which is called the Grand Tour and involves touring the world and a lot of Europe, if we weren't in Europe, we'd have to get a carnet made every single time we  wanted to go to any one of these countries and that would take a hundred years. 

'And cost a lot of money,' May added.  

But viewers soon witnessed the old Clarkson and May as they descended into typical bickering over Swiss knives - which was sparked after Clarkson claimed Switzerland was a 'waste of time'.

The 1.50 minute YouTube clip, published by the Remain campaign, was filmed on Thursday when David Cameron visited the TV stars in their studio in West London.

Clarkson, a controversial figure after his sacking from the BBC last year, surprised many by endorsing the campaign to stay in the European Union. 

During the visit on Thursday, Clarkson said to the PM: 'It's an extraordinary thing that James and I only agree on three things, which is sandwich spread is delicious, the old Subaru Legacy Outback is a good car and Britain staying in.'

During an informal talk with Mr Cameron over cappuccinos in Stronger In-branded mugs and croissants, Clarkson added: 'I have not, with the greatest of respect, heard one politician say anything that's caused me to change my mind.

'There's huge numbers that don't understand and get confused. Really, it's my gut.'

During the visit on Thursday, Jeremy Clarkson (left) said to the PM: 'It's an extraordinary thing that James and I only agree on three things, which is sandwich spread is delicious, the old Subaru Legacy Outback is a good car and Britain staying in'

During an informal talk with David Cameron (left) about the referendum, Jeremy Clarkson (pictured middle, next to James May) told the PM: 'I have not, with the greatest of respect, heard one politician say anything that's caused me to change my mind'

Clarkson said he felt there were 'compelling' reasons for leaving.

But, he added: 'They're not compelling enough for me to say I want to drive a Morris Oxford, which is what would happen.'

Clarkson has famously insulted many countries - on one occasion getting into hot water for suggesting the first German-built Mini had turn signals that looked like a Nazi salute.

Mr Cameron turned up with branded Britain Stronger in Europe mugs to try and reinforce his campaign

The biggest diplomatic incident triggered by the presenter focused on Argentina when he was accused of driving a car with an offensive number plate.

Despite his frequent gaffes, Clarkson is an enthusiastic European - once hosting an entire TV series dedicated to a driving tour of the continent. 

May said: 'If I'm honest, it's a gut feeling for me as well.

'There are too many people who think we will be alright... but that's just not true.'

The pair discussed the effects of Brexit on the UK car industry and Mr Cameron said manufacturers would face tariffs on exports to the continent in the event of vote to leave.

He said: 'I've spent a lot of time in different car plates in the last few years and if you look at Toyota, Nissan, Jaguar, Ford they are all doing well in Britain.

'They are all expanding, they are all making more, they are all selling more and if we were out - like America was out and with a trade deal like them - they would actually face a tariff on every single car they send to Europe.'

Clarkson added that his fellow presenter Richard Hammond was filming in France for the trio's new Amazon Prime show and was still undecided on how to vote.

'He is a don't know - he does not actually know there's a referendum on,' he joked.

In his previous declaration for Remain, Clarkson said it would be 'better to stay in and try to make the damn thing work properly'.

He wrote in the Sunday Times: 'Britain, on its own, has little influence on the world stage. I think we are all agreed on that.

'But Europe, if it were well run and had cohesive, well thought-out policies, would be a tremendous force for good.'

Mr Cameron and Clarkson live close to each in Oxfordshire and the PM offered support to his friend when he lost his job at the BBC's Top Gear for punching a producer.

Clarkson and May, together with Richard Hammond, are currently working on a new motoring show for the Amazon TV streaming service.

The trio set plans in motion for the new show following Clarkson's sacking and The Grand Tour is due to air later this year.



 

   

