'We should all be sitting together': Lindsay Lohan live tweets EU referendum vote 'from her bed' in series of nonsensical messages that have UNITED Britain in laughter 

2016-6-24

Britain's decision to leave the European Union was a neck-and-neck race.

And while the world watched in suspense, and the pound fluctuated, actress Lindsay Lohan has been weighing in on the topic.

Amidst the vote-counting, the 29-year-old has become something of a viral sensation - live-tweeting the results of the referendum.  

The Hollywood wild child threw her support behind a Remain vote, sending dozens of garbled messages about Obama, the pound and European safety directives.

And in the stream of bizarre political punditry, she tweeted her 9.28million followers to confirm she had not been hacked. 

She ended the four-hour report with a sultry photo from Nylon magazine seven years ago - her finger in her mouth and hair over her eyes - with the caption: '#remain'.

SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEO 



Not hacked: Actress Lindsay Lohan sent a string of garbled tweets about the EU referendum vote





Bizarre: The 29-year-old actress spoke out against counties who voted Leave and threw her support behind places like Shetland declared for Remain, describing Shetland residents as 'pure hearted people' 



Lohan started her garbled outpouring as the first EU referendum results were announced, writing: '#besmart pay attention and work hard to buy @chanel #remain where's Sunderland?'

She urged 'small shops' to 'pay more attention' and a lowering of the British pound 'will lower all margins'. 

And she has even quoted lines from her cult chick-flick movie Mean Girls, telling the Leave campaign 'you can't sit with us'. 

And constituencies that votes to stay in the EU have been getting their own personal 'thank you's tweeted from Lohan. 

At one point she directed a fierce tweet at Kettering, demanding to know where it was after seeing that the town had voted to quit the EU. Kettering is between Leicester and Cambridge.  

Celebrating the Shetlands Remain vote, the actress wrote: 'i love the #shetlands @BBCNews thank goodness we have pure hearted people our side #besmart #ShetlandsVSSunderland #BringItOn'. 

She added: '#OXFORD #EXETER #lambeth Workplace fatalities in the UK have reduced by half since European safety directives were introduced in 1996.' 

Drawing on a catchphrase from cult hit film Mean Girls, she said: 'We should all be sitting together'. She finished many of her tweets with #REMAIN, #onelove and #lovenothate.'

One particularly confused tweet read: 'yes.. as more research and care for all children will come if we #Remain'.

Lohan also appeared to compare the vote to the upcoming US presidential election, writing: 'well done #LONDON #remain is standing strong. America, do the same when you in America in November'.

Movie quotes: Apparently drawing on a famous Mean Girls catchphrase, Lohan wrote: 'We should all be sitting together' and hashtagged the tweet #youcantsitwithus

























