Better luck next time: Gibraltar returning officer's big moment as the world watches is ruined when someone's phone goes off as he goes to announce first referendum vote results

2016-6-24

It was supposed to be his big moment, but a Gibraltar returning officer's big moment was ruined - when someone's phone went off as he prepared to announce the first referendum vote results.

The eyes of the world were on Paul Martinez as he stepped up to reveal how 20,145 people had voted in the British Overseas Territory.

But as he geared up to deliver the results of the evening's count, a mobile phone's ring tone shattered his moment in the limelight.



The eyes of the world were on Paul Martinez (pictured) as he stepped up to reveal how 20,145 people had voted in the British Overseas Territory

As he geared up to deliver the results of the evening's count, a mobile phone's ring tone shattered his moment in the limelight

Footage captures the moment he looks down at his paper and prepares to speak - before the device rudely interrupts.

The unplanned stoppage prompts Martinez to frown, shrug his shoulders and look disapprovingly into the audience.

Less than impressed, he waits until the phone is turned off, shaking his head in disbelief at the people to his right.

Eventually, he is able to deliver the results - which turned out to shows a landslide for Remain.

There turned out to be 19,322 (95.91 per cent) votes to Remain and just 823 (4.09 per cent) for Leave.

The unplanned stoppage prompts Martinez to frown, shrug his shoulders and look disapprovingly into the audience

The British territory (pictured), at the entrance to the Mediterranean, relies heavily on its open border with Spain for trade

Meanwhile, Spain has demanded shared sovereignty over Gibraltar following the vote. 



The British territory, at the entrance to the Mediterranean, relies heavily on its open border with Spain for trade.

But acting Spanish foreign minister Jose Manuel Garcia-Margallo said he hoped 'co-sovereignty' of Gibraltar and 'the Spanish flag on the Rock' were much closer to happening in the wake of the vote.



Julie Girling, the South West England and Gibraltar Conservative MEP - who also backed Remain, said; 'I am deeply sorry that the people of the UK have chosen this leap in the dark. I believe future generations will question our wisdom.

'The EU has many faults, of course, but I remain convinced that we would be safer, stronger and better off by remaining a member.'

