FTSE 100 closes down just 2.7% after it recovers from record plunge as Bank of England promises £250bn to stabilise the economy after UK backs Brexit 

2016-6-23

The FTSE 100 rallied today and closed just 2.7 per cent down after more than £100billion was wiped out by panicked traders when Brexit was confirmed.

The London stock market has returned to the levels of last week despite dropping by seven per cent - around 450 points - when it opened this morning.

The UK's banks were the hardest hit with RBS shares down 34 per cent, Lloyds down 28 per cent and Barclays down 30 per cent as the markets opened.  

London's top flight index had lost more than £100billion earlier in the session, while world markets descended into chaos as uncertainty spread across the globe.  

Within minutes Bank of England Governor Mark Carney said would inject up to £250billion into the economy to steady the ship and the FTSE moved gradually upwards.

By 4,30pm £45billion had been wiped off the value of the UK's biggest companies and roughly 280 points had been restored. 

Sterling also began to creep back from its 10 per cent fall and 31-year low in the early hours of Friday morning, as it dropped 8.9% against the dollar at 1.365 US dollars. 

Brexiters had predicted  a sharp devaluation of the pound at the FTSE 100 was inevitable if they won, but argued that this would be healthy and boost exports.

It came after a night of drama as Brexit caused panic on the financial markets today as the pound dropped more than 10 per cent against the dollar and Britain was about to lose its AAA rating.



At 8am London's premier index plunged 458 points to 5,880 - down 7.19 per cent - as experts warned of more carnage to come.  





Drop: The FTSE 100 fell off a cliff this morning - down almost 8% - as Britain vote for Brexit became clear - but hours later it rallied towards the levels of last week

Drama: A TV shows the resignation of Britain's Prime Minister David Cameron as traders in London's Canary Wharf react to the news

Panic: Traders from BGC, a global brokerage company in London's Canary Wharf, react with fear and trepidation as the FTSE fell off a cliff this morning



The UK's banks have been the hardest hit with RBS shares down 34 per cent, Lloyds down 28 per cent and Barclays down 30 per cent as the markets opened. 

Shares in Britain's largest building and insurance companies were also devastated. 



Bank of England governor Mark Carney said 'some market and economic volatility can be expected' in the wake of the Brexit vote, adding that the Bank was well prepared.

Share trading in Japan was even halted by panicked traders as the markets went into freefall when the referendum result became clear. 

Traders around the globe were left in despair as their own markets fell because of the Brexit decision.

Dennis de Jong, managing director of UFX.com, said: 'This is simply unprecedented. The pound has fallen off a cliff and the FTSE is now following suit. Britain's EU referendum has been a cloud hanging over the global economy for the past few months and that cloud has got very dark this morning.

'The markets despise uncertainty, yet that is exactly what they're faced with this morning. The shockwaves are likely to reverberate for some time and the warning lights are flashing brighter now than ever.' 

Britain is set to lose its triple-A credit rating after voting to leave the European Union. S&P, the only ratings agency to maintain a AAA rating, has said that maintaining it is untenable.

Moritz Kraemer, chief ratings officer for S&P, told the Financial Times: 'We think that a AAA-rating is untenable under the circumstances.' 

David Cameron resigned over the result today and moments after Mr Cameron finished speaking, Mr Carney made a televised statement from the Bank of England in Threadneedle Street urging calm.

Mr Carney has said volatility 'can be expected' in the wake of the Brexit vote but said the Bank is prepared to provide £250 billion to support markets.

Bank of England governor Mark Carney (pictured today) said 'some market and economic volatility can be expected' in the wake of the Brexit vote

He said: 'Some market and economic volatility can be expected as this process unfolds.

'As a backstop, and to support the functioning of markets, the Bank of England stands ready to provide more than £250 billion of additional funds through its normal facilities.'

'The Bank will not hesitate to take additional measures as required as markets adjust and the UK economy moves forward.'

As he spoke, more than £100 billion was being wiped from the FTSE and the pound was crashing against the dollar.

Mr Carney also offered reassurance that there will be no immediate changes as a result of the vote.

He said: 'There will be no initial change in the way our people can travel, in the way our goods can move or the way our services can be sold. And it will take some time for the United Kingdom to establish new relationships with Europe and the rest of the world.' 



The markets began to shudder after the first bombshell result in Sunderland at around 1am, which far exceeded expectations in the Leave camp, provoked fierce new jitters in the City. 

The pound immediately plunged three per cent after the Sunderland result and at 2am was more than five per cent off against the dollar. The market rebounded some of the lost ground after Wandsworth voted strongly for Remain. 

But at around 3.30am as expectations of a Brexit vote grew and it became the bookies favourite for the first time, Sterling dropped like a stone. 

The Bank of England has said it will take 'all necessary steps' to ensure monetary and financial stability in the wake of the Brexit vote.

In a statement issued following Britain's referendum on the European Union, the Bank said: 'The Bank of England is monitoring developments closely.

'It has undertaken extensive contingency planning and is working closely with HM Treasury, other domestic authorities and overseas central banks. The Bank of England will take all necessary steps to meet its responsibilities for monetary and financial stability.'

The comments come after economists began to downgrade their forecasts for UK growth, with a recession forecast unless a quick deal with the EU can be done.

Japanese markets reopened after an automatic 10-minute shut down because of the currency drop. 

The Swiss central bank has said it has intervened in currency markets to limit the franc's rise after the UK voted to leave the European Union.



Plummeting: The pound dived by 3 per cent as the result in Sunderland was announced and revealed a huge win for the Leave campaign

Taipei, Taiwan: The benchmark TAIEX index lost 199.69 points, or 2.3 per cent, to finish at 8,476.99 points over fears that Briexit will hurt Taiwan's economy

London: A trader sits in front of his screens, one which displays the rate of the British pound which drops against the US dollar

Sea of red: A trader in Beijing watches as the markets fell downwards as Britain's exit from the EU became clear

Kuala Lumpur: A trader takes a nap before electronic boards showing stock movements at the Malaysia Stock Exchange dropping



Trading trends: Gold has topped $1,300 again, but the gain was far steeper if you wanted to buy or sell the precious metal in pounds

The gold price shot above $1,300 today as investors sought refuge from market tumult after the UK's vote to quit the EU.

But the gain was far steeper if you were buying or selling gold with pounds, after the UK currency took a hammering following the Brexit result and fell sharpley from $1.50 to $1.38.

The gold price in sterling jumped 20 per cent to more than £1,000 at one point, before settling back to around £940, while the rise in dollar terms was a more modest 3 per cent.

Gold mining stocks also stormed ahead on a day when most shares were mired in the red on London's market, led by Randgold with a 14 per cent gain and Fresnillo which surged 12 per cent in value in early trading.

Many people still hold gold as a store of value and safe haven asset - a hedge against inflation and other financial hazards - despite suffering big losses since its all-time price peak of $1,900 an ounce in 2011.

Gold hit lows not much above £1,000 in summer 2015, but the price staged a partial recovery earlier this year as investors grew nervous about the prospects for global growth and other economic threats, including Brexit.

'Gold rocketed this morning as the shock UK referendum result saw carnage in financial markets, prompting a rush to safe haven assets,' said Ross Norman, boss of bullion broker Sharps Pixley. 



Chancellor George Osborne's former economic adviser, Rupert Harrison, said the fluctuations in the pound were 'an expression of the deep uncertainty that is going to face businesses all around the country and indeed in the whole of Europe'.

'How can they invest when they don't know what is going to happen next, what their trading relationship is going to be,' he told ITV News.

'We've had a lot of predictions during the campaign, the economics profession amazingly united saying this would be a negative shock to the British economy and I think we are seeing indications of that in these market moves tonight.' 

Shadow chancellor John McDonnell told BBC News: 'That is exactly the sort of shock we were expecting so I would expect the Bank of England to intervene in the morning.

'Chancellors and shadow chancellors can't comment on sterling but what we can do is have a mature approach to this and say whatever the outcome, we will negotiate the best deal we possible can with regard to our trading partners in Europe and in that way we might give some assurances to the market.'   



After the shock of Brexit the FTSE 100 Index recovered slightly to a slight drop of four per cent. 

European markets were also clawing back from hefty falls of more than 9%, but remained heavily in the red, with Germany's Dax down 5.8% and the Cac 40 dropping 7.7%.

Sterling began to creep back from its 10% fall in the early hours of Friday morning, as it dropped 7% against the dollar at 1.392 US dollars.

The pound was down just under 5% against the euro at 1.250.

Alex Edwards, head of dealing desk at UKForex, said: 'The pound has recovered off of this morning's low. Carney offered some reassurance to a market desperate for it, and cable is back through 1.38.

'The next head to roll is likely to be Osborne, but it's unlikely to give the pound any more impetus - a recovery through 1.40 seems very unlikely at this stage. The US reaction will be interesting, and we could still see fresh lows in the pound today.' 



A vendor counts the British pound at a money changer booth at in Singapore as the pound slumped

A trader was working through the night as the Leave campaign took a massive lead, sending the pound into free fall in the early hours 





The London market resembled a sea of red, with heavy-weight financial stocks and travel firms falling sharply.

However, it was the housebuilders which bore the brunt of the slump, with Taylor Wimpey standing at the top of the biggest fallers, off more than 23% or 46p to 146.4p.

Charles Church-owner Persimmon was also down 23% or 499p to 1598p, while Berkeley Group slid 20% or 685p to 2600p.

Lloyds Banking Group took a hefty hit, down 20% or 15.3p to 56.9p, while Barclays dropped 19% or 35.9p to 150.8p.

Among the travel firms under pressure, British Airways-owner IAG was 19% lower or 104.4p at 423.6p and budget airline easyJet also plummeted 19% or 299p to 1234p.

In retail stocks, Marks & Spencer was off 10% or 39.3p at 327p, while Next slid 9% or 520p to 5015p.

The price of oil took a tumble, dropping 4.2% or 2.2 dollars to 48.76 US dollars (a barrel in the wake of the Brexit decision, with oil majors Royal Dutch Shell and BP falling 67.5p to 1823p and 17.9p to 368.7p respectively.

However, safe haven stocks were soaring as gold rallied to a two-year high at 1358 US dollars, before paring back to 1306.

Gold miner Rangold Resources was the biggest riser, up 16% or 1055p to 7510p, while silver miner Fresnillo climbed 11% or 140p to 1379p, as investors ran for cover as the markets fell sharply. 



Climbing: The pound was up 0.4 per cent at $1.4770 after touching $1.4847 as it continues to climb this week

Onwards and upwards: Against the euro the pound has hit €1.30, up from €1.26, although this could all reverse tomorrow if the UK votes Leave



UBS said: 'In the event that extreme market moves occur in an environment of limited liquidity, our principal spreads may widen . . . liquidity may reduce and prices may turn indicative [ie: non-tradable] for periods of time.'

Yesterday UBS warned that a Brexit vote would send the London market into freefall, with the FTSE 100 plummeting to levels of between 4,900 and 5,500, while wiping off around £350billion in the process.

In a separate note, the bank said: 'Following the risk-rally of the last few days, we believe there is significant room for downside in the event of a Leave vote.

'We estimate percentage moves in the mid-teens for UK and EU equities but materially smaller moves for the S&P 500 and EM equities.

'While the pound may come under significant pressure, the euro may be more stable. Risk currencies (Swiss Franc and Japanese Yen) would benefit, but policy responses could limit the degree of strength quickly.' 

'The world's first DIY recession?' Top fund manager warns investors to brace themselves as pound crashes and shares tumble on UK's seismic vote to split with EU 

One of Britain's leading fund managers has forecast that the UK will enter the 'world's first DIY recession' off the back of its Brexit vote.

The stock market tumbled and the pound crashed 8 per cent to $1.38 against the dollar in response to the UK's seismic referendum vote to leave the EU, plunging the City and financial markets into turmoil. 

'The biggest sadness of today is that it is reasonable to assume that the UK will quickly enter a period of economic recession, the key reason why we believed the outcome would be different from what has materialised today, said Richard Buxton, veteran fund manager and head of equities at Old Mutual.

'It is, in effect, likely to be the first ever 'DIY recession', as George Osborne prophetically called it,'

Shock result: Leave campaigners won a seismic vote for the UK to leave the EU

The FTSE 100 stock market index initially opened 7 per cent down as nervous investors ditched shares that they had bought as the market bet big on Remain in the run up to the vote, but it was off the worst lows after the first hour of trading.

By 9.45am the Footsie was down 3.9 per cent at 6,091.3 - a steep fall but only back to where it was on 4 January, the first trading day of 2016, when it closed at 6,093.4.

Sterling was down a less sharp 6 per cent against the euro to €1.24, as the fallout from the historic split will be felt directly in Europe as well as the UK. 

The shock result saw the pound plummet to a 31-year low of $1.35 at one point this morning, and currency markets are expected to enter a period of extreme volatility until the UK's new terms of trade with its ex-EU partners become clear. 

Britain's most famous fund manager Neil Woodford said: 'This clearly represents a very significant decision for the UK, for the European Union and indeed for the wider global economy. Markets are clearly shocked by the decision but, in our view, it is not as negative a development as the market's initial reaction appears to imply.

'We have been clear in our thinking on the economic implications of Brexit for some time. The independent report that we commissioned on the subject (if you haven't read it, please do, particularly if you need reassuring on what this decision is likely to mean for the economy), concluded that Britain's long-term economic future would be largely unaffected by a decision to leave the European Union. We stand by these conclusions.

'That is not to say there won't be challenges in the near-term. There will. We now face a period of uncertainty as the exact terms of Britain's exit from Europe are negotiated. Financial markets loathe uncertainty as amply demonstrated by this morning's reaction across all asset classes.' 



Mr Buxton, who has a 30-year investing career and is also chief executive of fund management giant Old Mutual, said that the fallout from the Leave vote could include an interest rate cut, mass stock market selling and even contribute to a US recession.

He forecast that British-listed firms with mainly domestic customers and businesses would suffer the most in the sell-off. 

He said: 'It is difficult to say at this stage what action the Bank of England may take, but it is not impossible to imagine that it may quickly cut interest rates. Restarting the programme of quantitative easing – a feature that has been absent from the economic landscape for some three years now – also looks a possibility. At the very least, the central bank is likely to indicate its preparedness to take such action.

'We believe that the prospects for domestically focused UK businesses are clearly the bleakest of all. FTSE multinationals will, on a relative basis, almost certainly perform better than their domestically oriented peers as the weaker pound will support overseas earnings when translated back into sterling.

'Nevertheless, investors should now brace themselves for an unpleasant period of relatively indiscriminate selling as funds aim to meet redemptions in conditions where liquidity may be more limited than usual.

'In terms of international markets, there seems to be a real possibility that the result could contribute to tipping the US economy into recession.

'The result, in our view, also has potentially very serious implications for the future of the European Union itself; a break-up of the broader union has today become a distinctly greater possibility, and we would not be surprised to see amplified calls from, for example, the Netherlands, Sweden and Denmark to leave the EU.'

While the short-term outlook is for volatility, some are more sanguine over the long-term effect of the vote to leave the EU.

Peter Elston, chief investment officer, Seneca IM, said: 'It was patently clear from the debate that even those campaigning to leave the EU did not know precisely what a post-Brexit world would look like.

'The financial markets are sending a clear message today that it could well be bleak, though that is by no means a certainty. Indeed 52 per cent of the electorate believes that the UK's prospects are now brighter. They and their flag bearers should now be listened to.'

'After the 1992 devaluation the pound managed to regain all of the ground it lost against Europe's currencies within a couple of years, so it remains to be seen if sterling will remain depressed for long,' said Russ Mould, investment director at broker AJ Bell.

'However, if there is a prolonged weakness in sterling that could actually help some of the FTSE 100's individual constituents, as around three-quarters of the index's aggregate sales come from overseas. '

Don't panic! Investors urged to stay calm, avoid booking losses and look for fresh opportunities amid market chaos 

The UK's momentous vote to quit the EU has sparked warnings from investing experts to sit tight and avoid booking losses during the immediate market panic after the shock result.

The pound crashed nearly 10 per cent overnight and the FTSE 100 opened 8 per cent or 488 points down at 5,849.9 down after the close 52-48 per cent vote in the EU referendum.

'Markets dislike uncertainty and they now face this in spades. However, this is a moment for investors to take a deep breath and focus on their long-term investment goals,' said Tom Stevenson, investment director for personal investing at Fidelity International.

Stay calm and carry on: Investor urged not to panic sell and to focus on ong-term goals after vote to quit EU

'As hard as it may be right now for investors to remain calm, it is important to remember that market volatility is a normal part of long-term investing and with the benefit of hindsight some of the most turbulent times in stock market history are barely visible on a chart of the market's ups and downs. 

'Over time the risk of holding equities is usually rewarded and markets invariably overshoot in both directions.'

Michelle McGrade, chief investment officer at TD Direct Investing, said: 'I urge investors not to panic by the initial shock and focus on the longer term because it's never been right to sell at bottom of markets.

'The world isn't ending, it's changing with new challenges and opportunities – let's today not forget the opportunities. Markets are forward looking, the dust will settle and investor confidence will return.'

Adrian Lowcock, head of investing at AXA Wealth, said: 'Times of uncertainty will knock investor confidence as they see falling share prices and panicked experts predict doom and gloom. This leads to making quick and often irrational decisions, such as selling after the market has fallen.

'Companies will adjust and the British economy will adapt. Investors need to look through all the noise and remain focused on their personal goals. Any sell-off will produce opportunities for prudent investors looking at the big picture and focused on the longer term.

'A weaker sterling will help the UK become more competitive and could boost the earnings of many of UK's large companies where the bulk of profits are made overseas.'

He offer three basic tips for investors: do nothing, review your goals and look for opportunities.

Richard Stone, chief executive of The Share Centre, said: 'At a personal level a majority of investors may welcome the result as it meets with the wishes a majority indicated to us in our recent customer surveys. However, it is likely in the short term to result in increased market volatility amid uncertainty over what a vote to leave will mean for the UK.

'That negative short-term outlook may soon be reversed for those companies which will benefit from their exports being more competitive or their overseas earnings being more valuable in sterling terms.

'Investors will need to be sure-footed in identifying those companies which may benefit from the outcome of the vote and look for opportunities where whole sectors have been written down without any meaningful differentiation between companies to reflect the variation in impact the vote will have. The market will return to valuations based on fundamentals in due course.'

Shock result: Prime Minister David Cameron announced he would resign following the Brexit vote

Jason Hollands, managing director of wealth management group Tilney Bestinvest, said: 'Investors will be looking for words of reassurance and coordinated action from central bankers to demonstrate they have prepared for this eventuality and that they will provide the necessary liquidity to shore up the financial system in the immediate aftermath.

'It's also imperative that politicians, in particular the Chancellor, George Osborne, rapidly reign back from some of the recent alarmist campaign rhetoric, to one that is more measured in tone and does not stoke further panic.

'Investors are going to need to hold their nerve through the coming days. Although the scale and rapidity of the slide in sterling is enormous, the UK has previously endured sharp devaluations in sterling before, notably following the ejection of the pound from the European Exchange Rate mechanism and in the aftermath of the banking crisis. While painful at the time, both were followed by periods of economic expansion.'







