Turks: Cameron's our No1 backer! PM said Turkey wouldn't join the EU until 3000... but they say he is on their side

2016-6-22

A senior adviser to Turkey’s president last night said David Cameron was his country’s ‘chief supporter’ in its bid to join the European Union.

In hugely embarrassing comments for the Prime Minister, Islamic hardliner Recep Erdogan’s top aide said he was shocked to hear Mr Cameron say he did not expect Turkey to join the EU for many years.

Ilnur Chevik told BBC2’s Newsnight: ‘We are really flabbergasted! We thought Mr Cameron was our chief supporter for our quest in European Union membership. We felt that when we needed him, he was going to be there.

A senior adviser to Turkey’s president last night said David Cameron was his country’s ‘chief supporter’ in its bid to join the European Union

‘Turks felt that the British were the driving force behind our EU membership and that they were supporting us right to the hilt. But the way Mr Cameron put it – he didn’t believe anything, apparently, in our full membership. He was only deceiving us and he was just buying time.’

Mr Cameron has spent the referendum campaign playing down the prospect of Turkey’s 77 million citizens getting free movement to the UK by joining up. In the first televised referendum debate, on Sky TV, he claimed that Turkey would not become a member of the EU ‘until about the year 3000’.

During a later debate, on Question Time, he said: ‘I can’t find a single expert anywhere in the country or in Europe who thinks that Turkey’s going to join the EU in the next three decades.’

Asked if he would veto Turkey’s entry, Mr Cameron replied: ‘It’s not going to come up.’

Earlier this week, it emerged the British embassy in Ankara had a ‘dedicated team’ working towards securing Turkey’s EU membership.

In Turkey two years ago, Mr Cameron said: ‘In terms of Turkish membership of the EU, I very much support that. That’s a long-standing position of British foreign policy which I support.’

And in a speech at the Turkish parliament in Ankara in July 2010, Mr Cameron said: ‘I’m here to make the case for Turkey’s membership of the EU. And to fight for it.’

Islamic hardliner Recep Erdogan's aide Ilnur Chevik told BBC2’s Newsnight: ‘We are really flabbergasted! We thought Mr Cameron was our chief supporter'

In last night’s referendum debate, Labour MP Gisela Stuart said: ‘I would quite like the real David Cameron to step forward and tell us what the real policy on Turkey is.

‘On the one hand he tells us [they will join] in the year 3000, or is it now 30 years, and on the other hand we are spending £1.9 billion of your money to accelerate accession of Turkey. Which David Cameron are we to believe?’

It came as Mr Cameron was accused of ‘panicking’ after delivering an unexpected address outside No 10, urging older voters to put ‘those who are yet to be born’ first.

Leave campaigners said he breached the ‘spirit’ of campaign rules that state he should not take advantage of Government buildings. They said if Mr Cameron wanted to argue the case for Britain staying inside the EU, he should have appeared in last night’s Wembley debate, which he refused to attend.

Tory MP Iain Duncan Smith said: ‘The fact he chose to speak from the No 10 steps without taking a single question shows not only how weak he knows his case to be, but also that he is panicking.’

 

