'This is what happens when infographic designers get drunk at work': Bewildered BBC viewers slam 'distracting' and 'meaningless' referendum charts

2016-6-24

Thousands of Britons have stayed up overnight to watch the results come in in the historic EU referendum.

Broadcasters have rolled out a dazzling array of colourful and complex graphics as part of their referendum coverage, supposedly to help viewers better understand the breakdown of votes.

However dozens of BBC viewers have been left confused by the news team's charts and graphs, branding them 'meaningless', 'incomprehensible' and 'distracting'.

Over-the-top: BBC broadcaster Jeremy Vine stands in the middle of three different referendum graphics 





Criticism: Dozens of bewildered viewers took to Twitter to slam the bewildering bar charts and maps

The coverage is hosted by veteran broadcaster David Dimbleby, who is keeping viewers up to date by discussing incoming results with political editor Laura Kuenssberg and high profile guests.

BBC heavyweight Jeremy Vine has been given the task of explaining the breakdown of the votes, standing in the middle of three different graphics projected on to the green screen behind him.

A colour-coded map on the floor shows how each region voted, with bar charts illustrating the breakdown. 

On the wall across the back of the studio there is a complex 'polling index results', which compares actual and predicted voting patterns. 

There are also voting breakdowns being flashed across the screen, and additional graphs used when each council declares.

Twitter users shared their bewilderment over the graphics. One said: 'What a total waste of time and money those ridiculous BBC graphics are - incomprehensible. #referendum'. 





Seeing the funny side: Other social media users shared amusing tweets about the confusing infographics

Another wrote: 'How much money does the bbc spend on these fancy graphics? It wouldn't be so bad if they actually helped you understand what's happening.' 

Others joked about the confusing illustrations, writing: 'BBC news right now is showing what happens when infographic designers get drunk at work.' 

'These BBC graphics. It's like the late 90s on ketamine,' added another.  

It came as the scale of the divide in Britain over whether we should cut ties with the EU was exposed as results started to roll in. 



Disgruntled: The graphics - intended to make the voting process easier to understand - has confused viewers

Sunderland recorded a massive 61 per cent to 39 per cent win for Leave - shocking the Remain side which had been voicing confidence about its prospects for victory overall. 

The Pound - which soared in value earlier after Nigel Farage admitted he thought Brexit had lost - immediately nose-dived by nearly 3 per cent against the US dollar.

Labour sources said it expected bigger wins for Remain in some areas than people had predicted, but they would be offset by bigger victories for Brexit in other areas. 









