Car giants 'will be desperate to keep trading with UK': Leave campaign hits back at warnings from companies about Brexit 

2016-6-21

The Leave campaign last night hit back at warnings from foreign car companies about Brexit – claiming those same firms will be ‘desperate’ to strike a trade deal with Britain if it quits the EU.

American motor giant Ford claimed in a memo to its 14,000 UK staff that remaining in the EU would help create an ‘even stronger business and create a more secure future’ for employees.

Bosses of Jaguar Land Rover, Toyota, BMW and Vauxhall also said Brexit would put jobs and investment at risk.

Scroll down for video 

David Cameron speaks to workers about the benefits of Britain staying in the EU, during a visit to Vauxhall's Ellesmere Port plant

Ford warned Britain could lose access to free trade deals, and that hefty tariffs of up to 10 per cent could be imposed on imported vehicles and 2.7 per cent on exports.

Ford said: ‘This would significantly impact our business. The time taken to renegotiate trade agreements with the EU and other countries also risks leading to a prolonged period of uncertainty.’

The car industry has been one of Britain’s brightest success stories since the financial crisis, supporting 800,000 jobs in the UK and contributing £15.5billion to the economy.

Trade body the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders added that the strong British car industry could be jeopardised if the public votes to leave the EU.

The Remain campaign is hoping that the dire warnings from some of the biggest car manufacturers will unnerve voters ahead of the referendum.

But last night Eurosceptics rejected the gloomy prognosis put forward by the industry. 

Professor Patrick Minford, co-chairman of Economists For Brexit, and a former adviser to Margaret Thatcher, said: ‘The British car industry is hugely successful and has competed with all comers in the world.

‘I don’t see why it can’t thrive outside the EU. The Germans and the French will be desperate to do a trade deal with us because the UK is such a key market.’

The boss of Aston Martin told employees that leaving the EU would make British exports ‘more competitive’ because of the likely devaluation of the pound

Jacob Rees-Mogg, the Eurosceptic Tory MP, said car manufacturers are 'doing much better outside of the single market'

And deviating from the car industry’s script the boss of Aston Martin told employees that leaving the EU would make British exports ‘more competitive’ because of the likely devaluation of the pound.

In a memo to its 1,800 UK staff, the firm – which is jointly owned by Italian and Kuwaiti investment firms – weighed up the pros and cons of Brexit.

The EU must take a long, hard look at itself whatever the result of the referendum, European Council president Donald Tusk said yesterday.

The ex-Polish prime minister, who chairs meetings of EU leaders, said they should not ignore dissatisfaction with Brussels across the continent.

Speaking during a visit to Portugal, he said: ‘Whatever the result is going to be, we must take a long, hard look on the future of the Union. We would be foolish if we ignored such a warning signal as the UK referendum.’

Mr Tusk also pleaded with British voters not to leave, saying: ‘Without you, not only Europe, but the whole Western community will become weaker.’



Chief executive Andy Palmer said it would probably have a ‘negative effect on UK GDP growth in the near term’.

But he added the impact ‘is likely to be offset in part by the depreciation in the pound making our exports more competitive’.

Jacob Rees-Mogg, the Eurosceptic Tory MP, said: ‘Car manufacturers are doing much better outside of the single market. 

'They are refusing to see this and are just drinking their own bathwater. It’s good to see that Aston Martin is being more phlegmatic – much like James Bond would be.’ 

The Leave camp argues firms such as Germany’s BMW and Volkswagen and French car maker Peugeot are so reliant on the UK market that they will rush to strike a free trade agreement with Britain.

They also point out that sales outside the EU are growing faster to rapidly growing countries such as China and India than within the struggling single market. 

A record number of cars – 77.3 per cent of total production – were exported, with 1,227,881 vehicles leaving the UK. Demand from the EU grew 11.3 per cent, with 57.5 per cent of cars sold to the continent.

But sales of British-made cars to countries outside the EU are growing more rapidly, with demand from the US rising by 26.5 per cent.

