'My pain is too much': Revealed, the tragic last words of murdered MP Jo Cox as her assistant desperately pleaded with her to try to get up after she had been shot and stabbed in the street 

2016-6-17

Jo Cox's poignant last words as she lay dying in the street after being shot were: ‘I can’t make it, I’m in too much pain.’

They were revealed yesterday by the MP’s assistant Fazila Aswat, who had just dropped her off outside her constituency surgery.

She also described the agony of Mrs Cox’s husband Brendan over how to break the news of the tragedy to their two young children, pleading to the aide: ‘What am I going to tell them?’

Struggling to understand what had happened as she saw the MP lying bloodied on the ground, Miss Aswat, 38, swung her handbag at the attacker, begging Mrs Cox: ‘Come on Jo, get up.’

This was when the 41-year-old MP spoke her last words.

Fazila Aswat, Mrs Cox's assistant and friend, was with the Batley MP in her final moments. Her father has told of the shocking episode

Her husband Brendan changed his Facebook profile picture to this family photo on Friday

Her attacker then shot Mrs Cox twice more as she lay prone and fled, according to witnesses. She was pronounced dead around an hour later.

Miss Aswat, who had worked for the MP for a year, is too distressed to speak publicly, but the horrifying detail of the attack was given yesterday by her father, former Labour Councillor Ghulam Maniyar, 59.

He told the Daily Mail his daughter had just driven Mrs Cox from Batley, West Yorkshire, to nearby Birstall, where she was about to hold her constituency surgery on Thursday.

The MP left the car first, and when Miss Aswat followed her shortly afterwards she was confronted by a horrific scene.

‘When she came out to the other side (of the car) she saw Jo lying on the floor, full of blood,’ Mr Maniyar said.

‘She was in shock. When she saw the blood, she tried to help. And she says: “Come on Jo, get up.”

‘And Jo said – these are the last words she spoke to my daughter – she said: “I can’t make it, I’m in too much pain.”’

Mrs Cox was on her way to meet constituents when she was attacked. Fazila Aswat has worked for the MP since she was elected last year

Mr Maniyar said the gunman had stepped away – possibly because passers-by were trying to tackle him – before coming back.

‘My daughter tried to hit him with the bag and he pointed his knife at her, but he did not attack my daughter,’ he said. ‘But he shot Jo again, in front of my daughter.’

He added: ‘Jo was in a terrible condition. My daughter said she could tell she was very seriously injured.’

He told ITV News her attacker ‘must [have been] waiting outside where the surgery happens’.

Describing his daughter’s desperate efforts to help, he added: ‘She could not do anything else. She tried to comfort her.

‘Then the police came, the air ambulance came, they took her to hospital. My daughter was a witness and her clothes were full of blood.’ Mr Maniyar said: ‘She is coming to terms with what happened but it will take time. They were very close, like sisters. But it’s not just my daughter who’s upset, the whole community is upset.

‘The beauty about Jo – I’ve been in this country for 55 years and I’ve seen many MPs in this area, but she’s unique. In one year she won the heart of the community. As a mother of two to do this job as well, she was a wonderful woman.

‘She was always smiling, I’ve never seen her angry. If somebody was angry, she would calm them down. That’s the type of person she was. I just think about her two beautiful children.’

Left, A framed photograph of MP Jo Cox and her husband outside 10 Downing Street has been placed among the floral tributes near the murder scene. Right, the much-loved MP pictured in her wedding dress 

Mr Maniyar added that he was in no doubt the gunman had deliberately targeted Mrs Cox. ‘It’s all right saying he’s mental and this and that,’ he told the Daily Mail. ‘But according to my daughter he didn’t want to hurt anybody else.

‘He could have used that gun or knife on my daughter but he did not. He targeted Jo. 

'I think he had a well-made plan to harm her. He stabbed her and gunned her down, my daughter was there and he did not attack anybody. That tells you he targeted Jo.’

He revealed that Mr Cox called his daughter on Thursday after the shooting to say: ‘We haven’t told the children yet. We’re going to tell them tomorrow morning, but what are we going to tell them?’

Vigils have been held across the UK in memory of Jo Cox as people were urged to honour her legacy by building a world with 'more love and less hate'

Thousands of people stood solemnly in silence in Parliament Sqaure in London, to remember the MP

The shooting of the popular politician - the first time a female parliamentarian has ever been murdered in the UK - has shocked the entire country and led to an outpouring of emotion among the people of her Yorkshire constituency. 



Mrs Cox, MP for Batley and Spen, was walking to a 'surgery' meeting with constituents in Birstall near Leeds when she was attacked by a gunman yesterday afternoon.

Witnesses said she was shot three times, once in the head, and repeatedly stabbed and kicked as she lay on the ground in a pool of blood.

The suspect's links to far-Right extremism are now being pursued as a 'priority line of enquiry', police said yesterday evening. Police are working with the North East Counter Terrorism Unit to investigate the murder. 



Gardener Thomas Mair is being questioned over the murder of the Westminster rising star. He has been described as a loner who was 'socially isolated and disconnected from society' as a result of long-term mental illness. 

Mair volunteered at Oakwell Hall country park in Birstall in 2010 after being a patient of the Mirfield-based Pathways Day Centre for adults with mental illness, according to a Huddersfield Examiner report at the time.

He told the paper: 'I can honestly say it has done me more good than all the psychotherapy and medication in the world.

'Many people who suffer from mental illness are socially isolated and disconnected from society, feelings of worthlessness are also common, mainly caused by long-term unemployment.'

It was reported Thomas Mair volunteered at Oakwell Hall country park in Birstall in 2010 after being a patient of the Mirfield-based Pathways Day Centre for adults with mental illness (pictured)

Police have also revealed Mrs Cox had received threats of a sexual nature at her Westminster office, which had been investigated by the Metropolitan Police.

Chief Constable Dee Collins of West Yorkshire Police said: 'We are aware of two previous unrelated incidents which culminated in Jo receiving a malicious communication of a sexual nature at her parliamentary office in Westminster.

'Both incidents were investigated by the Metropolitan Police Service which resulted in an individual receiving an adult caution for one offence which I can confirm is not the same person who we have in custody.' 

He added: 'Based on information available at this time, this appears to be an isolated, but targeted attack upon Jo - there is also no indication at this stage that anyone else was involved in the attack. However we will be investigating how the suspect came to be in possession of an unlawfully held firearm.

'The suspect in custody has been medically examined by two specialist medical practitioners who have determined that he is both fit for detention and fit for interview and detectives will continue to question the suspect during the day.' 



As the nation mourned the loss of the much-loved MP, flags flew at half mast above the Tower of London in tribute to Mrs Cox today 



From left: Ed Miliband, former deputy leader Harriet Harman and Wes Sweeting joined members of the public at a vigil  in front of the Houses of Parliament

Mr Maniyar added Mrs Cox 'was like a daughter' to him and called him 'uncle'.

He added: 'I think she was a caring person, not just an MP but she liked to help every human being, every single person.

'She worried about Syrian people, she worried about ordinary people. Whenever you approached her, she'd come forward with a smile and try to help you.

'It's shocking. Not just for my daughter but the whole community. We were living in harmony in the community, English community, Asian community. 

'This news is shocking for the whole community. My daughter, it will take time for her to recover.'

He added: 'I met her many, many times. She's a wonderful lady and we all sadly miss her. I saw Jo three days ago. 

'She was campaigning in town and she rang me and I went there. She took a picture with me and some colleagues. She was there smiling.' 

The usually quiet Yorkshire town has become the centre of the country's attention as people gather to leave floral tributes in Market Square



Locals have been left stunned by the sudden and violent attack on an MP who was extremely popular in the constituency

The scene this morning at the site where Mrs Cox was suddenly attacked as she walked towards her 'surgery' yesterday afternoon



Former Labour leader Ed Miliband said: 'We remember her as somebody who showed no fear in the face of danger, and we remember her too as somebody of the greatest warmth, the greatest generosity and the greatest compassion'

As campaigning for the EU referendum remained suspended in the wake of Mrs Cox's death, the Prime Minister David Cameron, Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn and Commons Speaker John Bercow set aside political debate to remember the much-loved campaigning MP.

They visited the town's market square, close to he scene of her killing, which is still cordoned off by police tape.

Joined by Commons chaplain Rose Hudson-Wilkin and Leeds Central MP Hilary Benn, they bowed their heads as they laid bouquets at the foot of the Joseph Priestley memorial, adding to the impromptu shrine of flowers and messages which has grown up over the past day.  

The Prime Minister said the whole nation was 'rightly shocked' at Mrs Cox's death, and called for people to 'value, and see as precious, the democracy we have on these islands'. Politics was about public service and MPs wanted to 'make the world a better place', he said.

And Mr Cameron added: 'Where we see hatred, where we find division, where we see intolerance, we must drive it out of our politics and out of our public life and out of our communities.

'If we truly want to honour Jo, then what we should do is recognise that her values - service, community, tolerance - the values she lived by and worked by, those are the values that we need to redouble in our national life in the months and years to come.'

UKIP leader Nigel Farage paid his respects and added his own floral tribute to Ms Cox in Parliament Square, Westminster, this afternoon 



Hilary Benn, MP for Leeds Central, Speaker of the House of Commons John Bercow, PM David Cameron, Commons chaplain Reverend Rose Hudson-Wilkin and Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn arrive in Birstall this afternoon

Egoin installs 'collective custom build' property in Edinburgh

Cruel moment man dumps his dog at the roadside before driving off

Police chief speculates there may not have been a drone at all

Bye Felicia! Hair-larious argument over bus seating arrangements

Teenage Meghan put on scene-stealing performance at Christmas show

Chris Evans thanks fans after final BBC Radio 2 breakfast show

Horrifying CCTV shows hit and run driver plough into young men

Shocking moment out-of-control snow plough hits woman in Russia

Hundreds of people flee amid fears 34-storey building will collapse

Dramatic aerial footage of the Krakatoa eruption in Indonesia

Former Lib Dem leader Paddy Ashdown dies aged 77

Smoke spews out of Krakatoa after eruption reportedly caused tsunami

Mr Cameron called the killing an 'attack on democracy' and said: 'Two children have lost their mother, a husband has lost a loving wife and parliament has lost one of its most compassionate campaigners'

Mr Corbyn looked emotional as he walked through the crowds of locals after laying a floral tribute at the scene this afternoon

Egoin installs 'collective custom build' property in Edinburgh

Cruel moment man dumps his dog at the roadside before driving off

Police chief speculates there may not have been a drone at all

Bye Felicia! Hair-larious argument over bus seating arrangements

Teenage Meghan put on scene-stealing performance at Christmas show

Chris Evans thanks fans after final BBC Radio 2 breakfast show

Horrifying CCTV shows hit and run driver plough into young men

Shocking moment out-of-control snow plough hits woman in Russia

Hundreds of people flee amid fears 34-storey building will collapse

Dramatic aerial footage of the Krakatoa eruption in Indonesia

Former Lib Dem leader Paddy Ashdown dies aged 77

Smoke spews out of Krakatoa after eruption reportedly caused tsunami

First Minister of Scotland Nicola Sturgeon (left) and Leader of Scottish Labour party Kezia Dugdale attended a vigil in memory of the Labour MP 



Justin Welby, the Archbishop of Canterbury, paid his own tribute to Mrs Cox this afternoon in Parliament Square, London

Their visit came after Conservatives announced that they will not contest the by-election resulting from her death.

The Prime Minister said the nation was 'rightly shocked' at her death, adding: 'Two children have lost their mother, a husband has lost a loving wife and Parliament has lost one of its most passionate and brilliant campaigners.'

On the card attached to his bouquet, Mr Cameron wrote: 'Jo, a loving mother and wife, a passionate MP and campaigner. You died serving your constituents and country. We hold your family in our prayers. You will never be forgotten.'

Mr Corbyn wrote: 'In loving memory of a wonderful, passionate and committed woman. Her life was dedicated to justice and human rights and proud to represent Batley and Spen.'

Parliament is to be recalled on Monday to allow MPs to pay tribute to Mrs Cox, Mr Corbyn said. 





Thomas Mair (left) has been arrested over the killing of the MP. Records which emerged in the US this morning appear to show he bought books from a far-Right group, including one which described how to make a handgun at home

A receipt published in the US today appears to show Mair bought books on munitions, incendiaries and explosives in 1999

Documents obtained from a US far-right group and published this morning show a 1999 receipt for a manual on how to build a homemade gun with Mr Mair's name and address on the top.

Police on Friday evening confirmed they were investigating his links to the far-right 'as a priority'.  



According to US-based civil rights group, the Southern Poverty Law Centre (SPLC), Mair was sent an invoice for £430 ($620) worth of books by the National Alliance, which was a white separatist movement until it ceased operations as a membership organisation in 2013.

Among these was a book called 'Incendiaries' and one called 'Improvised Munitions Handbook', a manual on how to build a pistol, according to an invoice obtained by the SPLC.

Mrs Cox's friend and fellow Labour MP Rachel Reeves broke down in tears today as she and others visited the centre of Birstall this morning, where hundreds of flowers and cards have been laid by grieving locals. 



Dewsbury MP Paula Sherriff, Manchester Withington MP Jeff Smith and Manchester Central MP Lucy Powell also left bouquets of red roses among the floral tributes to their colleague.

The group, with Labour Party member Karen Rowling, could not contain their emotions as they stood looking at the flowers and reading the messages at the Priestley Memorial in Birstall.

Also today, in an apparent reference to the referendum campaign, German chancellor Angela Merkel urged British politicians to 'draw limits' around the language used in political debate, warning that otherwise 'radicalisation will become unstoppable'. 

The investigation into the killing continued as the a memorial in the town became a shrine with flowers and messages placed at its foot

Forensic officers are seen outside the home of Mair, who has been linked to far-Right group abroad, as the investigation continues

Egoin installs 'collective custom build' property in Edinburgh

Cruel moment man dumps his dog at the roadside before driving off

Police chief speculates there may not have been a drone at all

Bye Felicia! Hair-larious argument over bus seating arrangements

Teenage Meghan put on scene-stealing performance at Christmas show

Chris Evans thanks fans after final BBC Radio 2 breakfast show

Horrifying CCTV shows hit and run driver plough into young men

Shocking moment out-of-control snow plough hits woman in Russia

Hundreds of people flee amid fears 34-storey building will collapse

Dramatic aerial footage of the Krakatoa eruption in Indonesia

Former Lib Dem leader Paddy Ashdown dies aged 77

Smoke spews out of Krakatoa after eruption reportedly caused tsunami



The group could not contain their grief after they left messages on flowers saying: 'Goodnight beautiful lady' and 'RIP Jo'

MPs from across the country rallied to pay tribute to the popular and much-loved MP. Pictured, First Minister of Scotland Nicola Sturgeon (L) and Leader of Scottish Labour party Kezia Dugdale attended a vigil in George Square, Glasgow



The vicar of Birstall said the community is 'stunned' after the death of Jo Cox as he opened a book of condolence.

More than 400 people packed into St Peter's Church in the West Yorkshire village on Thursday night to pay their respects to the young Labour MP in a vigil.

On Friday, the Rev Paul Knight opened a book of condolence as church members provided tea and a place for contemplation.

The vicar said: 'We wanted to give people the opportunity to pass on their sympathies for Jo, who was obviously so much liked in this area.At this point people don't know what to do.

'So we're giving them the space and the opportunity to voice or express their concerns, and their disappointments and their hurt.'

He added: 'I think for the most part people are just stunned. Shocked but stunned.'





'I don't think we should link the referendum to Jo's death': Friend and fellow Labour MP Rachel Reeves rejects claims bitter Brexit battle triggered deadly attack on Jo Cox

By James Tapsfield for MailOnline

A Labour MP has warned against linking the death of Jo Cox to the bitter battle over the EU referendum.

Rachel Reeves, a friend of Mrs Cox, dismissed the idea that the killing yesterday was a result of the way the campaign was being conducted.

The comments came after claims that the MP was targeted over her support for immigration and ties with Brussels.

Eyewitnesses said her attacker shouted 'Britain first' before shooting and stabbing her.

Greece's member of the EU commission, Dimitris Avramopoulos, waded into the row by insisting Mrs Cox was killed 'for her dedication to European democracy'.

German chancellor Angela Merkel has also blamed 'exaggeration' during the campaign for causing 'radicalisation'.

But a family friend of the suspected attacker has denied he was 'politically motivated' or felt strongly about the referendum.

Rachel Reeves, left, has rejected suggestions that there was a link between the EU referendum  and the killing of Jo Cox, right, yesterday

Mrs Cox's fellow MP Rachel Reeves breaks down in tears at the scene in Birstall market place this morning where her friend was murdered

And Ms Reeves, who wept at a service remembering her fellow MP last night, said: 'There's of course going to be a lively debate around fundamental questions like our membership of the European Union.

'But, I don't think that's linked to what happened yesterday. I was at the vigil yesterday at Birstall parish church for Jo, where hundreds of her constituents came to pay tribute, not as a matter of courtesy but because they loved her, because she worked so hard for them.

'And I think if we're honest most MPs every week are doing that work for their constituents, but a lot of that gets ignored and forgotten in the commentary and I think maybe it is a time to reassess what the role of an MP is.

'Yes of course it's the debates about the big issues of our time, but also there is a role that MPs have serving their constituents.

'Often the last point of call is to go to an MP when they are desperate, whether that's on welfare, housing, anti-social behaviour or whatever.

'We don't know what the motives were of the guy who attacked her yesterday. I don't think we should link the referendum to Jo's death.'

Ms Reeves also insisted the tragic episode should not stop MPs interacting with their constituents - although she has closed her office today as a mark of respect.

'We mustn't let the actions of this man drive a wedge between MPs and the people who we were elected to serve,' she said.

'The work of an MP, our surgeries, our work in the community, must continue. But I think it's right today as well as ceasing the campaigning in the referendum that we close our office.

'I think, the fact that Jo died doing the job that she loved in the place that she loved in Birstall in Batley and Spen, is a reminder that the work of an MP isn't just in the Chamber of the House of Commons and in Westminster.

Shadow education secretary Lucy Powell was among those paying their respects in Birstall today

Campaiging for the EU referendum has been suspended as a mark of respect. The Conservatives have also announced they will not be contesting the by-election in Batley and Spen

The flag above Buckingham Palace flew at half mast today. The Queen is said to have written privately to Mrs Cox's husband

Flags were also flown at half mast outside City Hall in London as a mark of respect for the Labour MP for Batley and Spen

Thousands of people gathered for a vigil in Parliament Square in remembrance of the Labour MP

'So much of the work that we do is in our community, serving local people, probably where we can make the most direct impact on people's lives.

'A lot of people maybe don't see that work of an MP, but it's so important to me and obviously so important to Jo and all of us.

The Leeds West MP said the site where Mrs Cox was attacked was 'such a normal place'.

'The sort of street that is recognisable in any part,' she said. 'To think that such a horrific and violent crime took place against such a wonderful woman..there is a sense of numbness, not being able to believe what has happened

'And anger that someone could take away someone who had so much to give. Jo died doing the job she loved, in the place she loved, representing the people she loved.

'There is also grief and sorrow at the death of a mother, wife, daughter and a friend to many of us.'

The Conservative Party has announced that it will not contest the by-election in the Batley and Spen seat as a mark of respect to Mrs Cox.

