The referendum has contributed to 'anti-MP' feeling in the country, Corbyn warns as Michael Gove pays tribute to Jo Cox as someone 'we want our daughters to be like' 

2016-6-19

Jeremy Corbyn today warned the fierce battle over Brexit had contributed to an anti-MP feeling in Britain as he reflected on the killing of Jo Cox.

The Labour MP for Batley and Spen was killed outside her advice surgery on Thursday lunchtime and the referendum campaign was paused for two days as politicians of all colours united in grief.

As campaigning resumed today, tributes to the 41-year-old mother of two continued to pour in as senior figures were invited to reflect on recent days during Sunday morning political shows.

Labour leader Mr Corbyn told the BBC's Andrew Marr she was a 'passionate and committed' woman and reflected on the vigil he attended with David Cameron in Birstall on Friday.

Justice Secretary Michael Gove: 'I think she was the sort of person whom all of us would want our daughters to grow up to be like.' 

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn today warned the referendum had contributed to 'anti-MP' feeling as he renewed tributes to Jo Cox while Michael Gove said she was the 'sort of person whom all of us would want our daughters to grow up to be like'. Both men made their tributes on the BBC today, pictured 

He said: 'This was a murder of her but it was also an attack on democracy and an attack on the right of somebody to be elected to represent you.'

Asked if the tone of politics and the referendum had contributed to anti-MP feeling, Mr Corbyn said: 'I do. I think that MPs are perceived to be cut off - in reality most are not.

'Decision making is seen to be cut off from the lives of so many people with housing problems or their security at work, they face falling living standards.

'All those issues do make people feel, ''hang on what's the political system doing for me, what's it doing for us''.

'I think it creates a sense of anger and insecurity. Is the answer to that to kick it out or do something different?' 

Mr Gove recalled an occasion where he lent Mrs Cox a £5 note soon after she entered Parliament last year.

Mr Gove said: 'I struck up a conversation with her at the time, I had a few subsequent conversations, and she is as so many people who knew her far better than me have said, an amazing and wonderful person.

'She spoke with great passion and effectiveness, she campaigned for causes she believed in with a great heart - I think she was the sort of person whom all of us would want our daughters to grow up to be like.

'I can only grieve for her and in particular think of her poor children and her bereaved husband.' 



Mrs Cox, pictured on the Thames last year, was killed in Birstall on Thursday. Her death prompted the suspension of all campaigning for two days 

In his interview, the Labour leader insisted he did not want to see MPs sealed off from their constituents.

Mr Corbyn said: 'The whole point of democracy and involvement is when you elect someone - to a council, a union executive, anything else, MP - if you are to do your job you cannot leave the area, the people or the place that put you there.

'I love my constituency, I love my community and what I love is just walking about chatting to people, many of whom I have known for many years, because that way you pick up the reality of legislation, the reality in my case of austerity and poverty that goes with it.

'If you are in some kind of security bubble you very rapidly lose all of that. We have to defend that and we have to defend people against this kind of appalling attack that took place.'

Mr Gove echoed the concerns about MPs being cut off from their public but said it was important to 'reflect' on security measures.

MPs will gather at the House of Commons tomorrow to pay further tributes to Mrs Cox following a vigil in Parliament Square on Friday night, pictured 

MPs will gather in the House of Commons tomorrow afternoon to pay tributes and Commons leader Chris Grayling today said he would welcome mingling of MPs on both sides of the House.

Mr Grayling told Radio 5: 'This is a memorial occasion, it's a chance to pay respects and when we all gather again tomorrow conventional party politics should be a million miles away.

'At the end of the day people perhaps don't always recognise outside politics that there are genuinely good relations across all parties, across all sides of the House, and every single member of the House will feel as sense of deep grief as to what has happened.'

The Commons leader said parliament should consider putting a memorial to Jo Cox on the House of Commons wall.

He said: 'It has been the tradition that when a member of parliament has lost their life in the course of their duties they have been commemorated with a shield on the walls of the House of Commons chamber.

'It is obviously what her family wishes and it would be something that should be considered.'

Thomas Mair has been charged with the murder of Mrs Cox and made a first appearance at Westminster Magistrates' Court yesterday. 

