You're LYING! IDS accused Cameron of 'colluding' with the EU over Turkey's membership in an extraordinary attack on the eve of the referendum

2016-6-22

David Cameron has 'colluded' with the EU and is 'lying' to British voters over the EU, Iain Duncan Smith blasted today. 

The former work and pensions secretary reacted with fury to the confirmation from the Turkish government it saw Mr Cameron as the 'chief supporter' of its EU bid.

Vote Leave also claimed ex-PM Sir John Major had admitted today Turkish membership was possible within the lifetime of children at school today despite Mr Cameron's claims it will not happen before the year 3000.

Turkey's possible membership of the EU has dominated much of the referendum campaign as Vote Leave warned the country's accession would mean even higher levels of net migration. 

Iain Duncan Smith today accused David Cameron of 'colluding' with the EU over Turkey and claimed he was 'lying' to the British people 

Mr Duncan Smith said: 'David Cameron has repeatedly claimed that Turkey is not going to join the EU despite it being Government policy. Now the Turkish government has confirmed that he is the 'chief supporter' of their bid to join the EU.

'Cameron also said that Turkey will not join until the year 3000 but Sir John Major has let the cat out of the bag - Turkey could be in the EU in ten years' time.

'I'm afraid there is no conclusion you can draw from this, except that David Cameron is colluding with the EU and lying to the British people.

'Families are suffering the consequences of uncontrolled migration - a direct result of the EU's obsession with freedom of movement.

'They are suffering from downward pressure on their wages, and facing increased competition for housing, school places, and GP appointments to name but a few.

'With five more countries lining up to join the EU - Albania, Serbia, Montenegro, Macedonia, and Turkey - this problem can only get worse.

'That's why it is safer to Vote Leave.'

Sir John Major, pictured today at an eve-of-poll rally, said Turkey would not join within decades but Vote Leave said this implied a much sooner timetable than admitted to by David Cameron 

At a Britain Stronger in Europe rally in Bristol today, Sir John said: 'I find it extraordinary that people should point to Turkey, and suggest that 77 million Turks are suddenly going to descend and take all of our hospital places and all our school places and all our local authority dwellings.

 The issue of Turkish accession to the EU has become caught up in the campaign for Thursday's bitterly-fought Brexit referendum.

Amid charges by the 'Leave' camp that accession will allow millions of Turks into the country, the issue has exploded the debate over immigration.

David Cameron insists Turkey will not join the 28-nation bloc for years, even though the government's official position is to support Ankara's membership.

Since Muslim-majority Turkey formally launched its membership bid in 2005, the EU has opened 15 chapters out of the 35 required to join the bloc.

So far only one chapter has been completed, with disagreements over Turkey's human rights record an obstacle for many EU states.

Under the March accord, the EU also agreed to boost aid to Turkey to cope with millions of refugees, mostly Syrians, on its territory and to speed up visa liberalisation.

'They have been negotiating for 30 years without getting in. They are not going to get in in my judgment for one, two decades - perhaps not ever.

'Even if they do get in, we're not in the Schengen zone. Even if it happened in some far distant future, what obscenity it is to suggest all 77 million Turks are suddenly going to say, let's go to the United Kingdom.

'The national minimum wage has risen by 50p, let's get there as fast as we can! If they do happen to say that, let me just mention to them in advance that they would actually earn more in France or in Germany than they actually would here.'

Vote Leave said this meant Sir John was accepting the possibility by talking about the possibility of Turkey joining in 'one, two decades'. 



The EU will in open new membership talks with Turkey as planned in a few days, EU diplomatic sources said Wednesday, just as Ankara's accession becomes a hot-button issue in Britain's vote on its future in the bloc.

One source, who asked not to be named, told AFP that EU member states will meet June 30 to agree to open a new negotiating chapter with Turkey on finance and budget affairs.

European Union leaders pledged in March to speed up Turkey's long-stalled membership talks as part of an accord on tackling the migration crisis, promising to open at least one new chapter by the end of June. 



British voters were today warned there is no chance of a second renegotiation with the EU if they back Brexit tomorrow.

Jean-Claude Juncker, the EU Commission President, said 'out is out' and ruled out re-opening talks in a bid to reverse a vote to quit the EU.

In remarks sure to be seized upon by the Vote Leave campaign, Mr Juncker said David Cameron got the 'maximum' reform possible in his renegotiation that was concluded in February.

The deal has been derided as empty and useless by Brexit campaigners and the Prime Minister has been forced to admit more reform is still needed.

EU Commission president Jean-Claude Juncker today claimed David Cameron had already extracted the 'maximum' from the EU Britain would not get any other reforms by voting for Brexit 

Mr Juncker said today: 'The British policy makers and British voters have to know that there will not be any kind of renegotiation.

'Out is out.'

He added: 'We have concluded a deal with the prime minister. He got the maximum he could receive and we gave the maximum we could give.

'So there will be no renegotiation, not on the agreement we found in February, nor as far as any kind of treaty negotiations are concerned.'

Vote Leave champion Michael Gove said: 'The Remain Campaign has been claiming in recent days that if you vote to stay in the EU then there could be further reform. The President of the EU, Jean-Claude Juncker, has made very clear today that will not happen.

'If you vote to stay there is no prospect of getting any reform from the EU ever again. We will never get back control of the £350 million we give to the EU every week. The Prime Minister tried to get reforms earlier this year but the EU did not listen. The EU cannot and will not give the British people the change that they want.

'There is a very clear choice in this referendum. Either you vote to keep on giving the EU more power and more of our money every year or join me in voting leave to take back control.'

Michael Gove has made a grovelling apology after comparing pro-EU experts to Nazi propagandists.

The Justice Secretary admitted he had been 'clumsy and inappropriate' to make the comments as he dismissed dire forecasts for the consequences of Brexit.

The climbdown came after David Cameron branded the remarks a 'massive mistake' and suggested that Mr Gove had 'lost it'.

Michael Gove (pictured) compared economic experts warning about the fall-out of Brexit to the Nazis who orchestrated a smear campaign against Albert Einstein in the 1930s

Recalling the Nazis' treatment of Jewish scientist Einstein during the 1930s, Mr Gove had told LBC: 'I think the key thing here is to interrogate the assumptions that are made and to ask if these arguments are good.

'We have to be careful about historical comparisons, but Albert Einstein during the 1930s was denounced by the German authorities for being wrong and his theories were denounced, and one of the reasons of course he was denounced was because he was Jewish.

'They got 100 German scientists in the pay of the government to say that he was wrong and Einstein said: 'Look, if I was wrong, one would have been enough.'''

Mr Gove added: 'The truth is that if you look at the quality of the analysis, if you look at the facts on the ground, you can come to an appropriate conclusion.

'And the appropriate conclusion, I think, all of us can come to is that with growth rates so low in Europe, with so many unemployed and with the nature of the single currency so damaging, freeing ourselves from that project can only strengthen our economy.'

He made his comments after being challenged over why he is not heeding the advice of many economists who have warned that Brexit could have dire consequences and tip the economy into recession.

David Cameron has blamed mass immigration on our 'unnatural' economy as he insisted numbers will be curbed if we stay in the EU.

As the referendum campaign enters its final frantic hours, the Prime Minister said freedom of movement rules will be re-examined if we stay in the bloc.

He defended his target of bringing net migration down from around 330,000 a year to below 100,000 as 'realistic', and also denied that being in the Brussels club was like being 'shackled to a corpse'.

The claims came as both sides in the bitter campaign stepped up their efforts on the eve of the crucial ballot. Mr Cameron, former PM Sir John Major and Labour's Harriet Harman staged a rally in Bristol this morning.

David Cameron, former PM Sir John Major and Labour's Harriet Harman appeared together in Bristol to urge a Remain vote in the referendum tomorrow

Meanwhile, Boris Johnson is crossing the country in a helicopter appealing for people to vote for Brexit.

In a bad-tempered interview in BBC Radio 4's Today programme, Mr Cameron said immigration had been stubbornly running at around three times his target over recent years because it was 'not a normal period'.

'As recently as 2008, if you look at the situation of British people and European nationals leaving Britain to go to Europe and European nationals coming to Britain, there was actually net negative migration in terms of Europe,' he said.

 

