Cameron insists immigration CAN be curbed within the EU despite near-record figures in bad-tempered interview as referendum campaign enters final stages

2016-6-22

David Cameron has blamed mass immigration on our 'unnatural' economy as he insisted numbers will be curbed if we stay in the EU.



As the referendum campaign enters its final frantic hours, the Prime Minister said freedom of movement rules will be re-examined if we stay in the bloc.

He defended his target of bringing net migration down from around 330,000 a year to below 100,000 as 'realistic', and also denied that being in the Brussels club was like being 'shackled to a corpse'.

The claims came as both sides in the bitter campaign stepped up their efforts on the eve of the crucial ballot. Mr Cameron, former PM Sir John Major and Labour's Harriet Harman staged a rally in Bristol this morning.

Meanwhile, Boris Johnson is crossing the country in a helicopter appealing for people to vote for Brexit. 

David Cameron, former PM Sir John Major and Labour's Harriet Harman appeared together in Bristol to urge a Remain vote in the referendum tomorrow

Mr Cameron said people should vote to stay in the EU for a 'better future' as he kicked off a frantic final round of campaigning in Bristol

In a bad-tempered interview in BBC Radio 4's Today programme, Mr Cameron said immigration had been stubbornly running at around three times his target over recent years because it was 'not a normal period'.

'As recently as 2008, if you look at the situation of British people and European nationals leaving Britain to go to Europe and European nationals coming to Britain, there was actually net negative migration in terms of Europe,' he said.

'We've had an extraordinary five-year period where we've created more jobs than the rest of the European Union put together. Now, that is not a normal period.'

Mr Cameron said he believed the UK economy would continue to be strong, adding: 'I also think that the eurozone economies are recovering.

'You saw growth of 7 per cent in Ireland last year, you see Spain growing, France growing, Germany growing. So the fact is we've had an unnatural period.'

The Prime Minister talks to Charlie Allen, managing director of Shiner, at the company's offices in Bristol this morning

Mr Cameron inspects a skateboard on a campaign visit in Bristol. He has insisted he will not resign as Prime Minister if there is a Brexit vote

Of his net migration target he said: 'It is the right ambition, it is not an unrealistic ambition.

'But we shouldn't leave the EU to achieve the ambition.' 

Mr Cameron pleaded: 'As we try to meet the challenge of immigration, do we want to meet it by leaving the single market and tanking the economy?'

He added: 'We are reopening the freedom of movement directive as of the renegotiation.' 

Mr Cameron denied that Britain was currently 'shackled to a corpse'. 'You can see the European economy's recovery. It's the largest single market in the world,' he said.

The PM insisted the UK had a 'special status' within the EU that should not be given up.

He also repeated his claim that EU migrants could be sent home after six months if they had not found a job. 

'The idea you have to choose between being a success in the European single market of 500 million and campaigning to have jobs and wealth created by trading with other economies - you don't have to choose, you should do both,' he said.

'The vision of Britain in Europe is we do have a special status, we have the best of both worlds.

'We're in that single market, we're driving that single market, there are lots of things that Britain can help Europe to achieve - whether it's tackling terrorism or signing better trade deals in the future - but we have our own special status protected.

James Bond star Daniel Craig (pictured left) revealed his support for Britain staying in the EU after posing in a T-shirt with the slogan: 'No man is an island. No country by itself.'

James Bond star Daniel Craig is the latest celebrity to declare his support for Britain staying in the EU. 

He was pictured last night wearing a white T-shirt with the slogan: 'No man is an island. No country by itself. Vote Remain on 23rd June.' 

The picture of the retiring James Bond in the pro-EU T-shirt was first published by Turner Prize-winning artist Wolfgang Tillmans, who told his Instagram followers that Craig had sent him the picture. 

Minutes after the picture appeared online David Cameron tweeted it along with the words: 'It's great to see Daniel Craig is planning to Vote Remain on Thursday.' 



It delivers another boost to the Remain campaign after the endorsements of David and Victoria Beckham urged voters to support staying in the EU 'for our children'.

The England footballing hero and his fashion designer wife said Britain should be facing the challenges of the world together with its allies. 

He was joined by his former England colleague Rio Ferdinand, who compared EU membership to playing the success they achieved at Manchester United.  

'I'm a deeply patriotic person about this country. We have not been invaded for 1,000 years, we've got institutions that have served us well. I don't want to give that up to some sort of 'United Europe' and that's not what we're going to do.

'We're out of the euro, out of ever-closer union, we're proud Brits and really proud of what our country can achieve, but, frankly, we achieve more if we're in these organisations fighting for British interests and British values rather than standing outside for them.'

After a series of tetchy exchanges with presenter John Humphrys, the PM jibed: 'You will interrupt yourself John in a minute if you don't watch out.' 

Asked if he would continue to be PM regardless of the result, Mr Cameron replied: 'I will accept the instructions of the British people and get to work on Friday morning to deliver them.'

During the rally in Bristol Sir John took a swipe at Mr Johnson and Justice Secretary Michael Gove, suggesting he had 'expected better' from them.

Quitting the European Union will not stem immigration and risks creating a broken Britain, he insisted.

Leaving would be a 'disproportionate' response to migration concerns and the country would live to regret it for a 'long time to come'. 

He said: 'If our nation does vote to leave, we must respect their decision, but if they vote to leave on the basis of half-truths and untruths and misunderstandings, then pretty soon the grave-diggers of our prosperity will have some very serious questions to answer.'

'They will have to account for what they have said and done but that will be of little consolation for we will be out, out for good, diminished as an influence on the world. 

'A truly Great Britain shrunk down to a little England perhaps without Scotland, perhaps with a grumpy Wales, and certainly with a Northern Ireland divided from the south by the border the controls that would then be the edge of the European Union.'

Dismissing accusations that the Remain campaign had been 'project fear', he insisted that Mr Cameron had a 'duty' to to warn the nation of the dangers of quitting.

He said: 'In return for doing that he has faced a great deal of opposition and sometimes abuse from people who, frankly, we might have expected better from.

'I think the way in which he has conducted himself in putting the country before self and the country before party is quite remarkable.'

Mr Johnson was involved in brutal clashes with Sadiq Khan and fellow Tory Ruth Davidson during the BBC special last night.

He laid into the Remain side for 'talking the country down' by issuing a slew of dire Project Fear warnings about the consequences of cutting ties with Brussels.

But newly-installed London Mayor Mr Khan hit back by accusing him of telling 'lie after lie' and running 'Project Hate', while Scottish Conservative leader Ms Davidson lashed out at him for trying to turn the programme into 'the Boris show'. 

Mr Johnson was joined by Tory Treasury minister Andrea Leadsom and Labour's Gisela Stuart for the programme in front of a 6,000 strong live audience.

Alongside Mr Khan were Scottish Conservative leader Ms Davidson and TUC Secretary General Frances O'Grady. 

Taking to the stage in London last night, Mr Khan said the country would face the 'most important decision for a generation' on Thursday.

A Remain vote would mean people are 'both better off and safer'.

Audience member Maxine Fothergill said she was a small business owner employing 10 staff and told the panelists that her firm was one of many in the UK that were 'stifled' by EU regulation. 

Ms Davidson said she knew the EU was 'a bit frustrating but what it means is you cannot be undercut'.

She insisted that tariffs and taxes would be increased if we were outside the EU.

But Mr Johnson laughed off the idea of tariffs, arguing that Germany sold a fifth of its car output in the UK.

'I must say that I think that it was extraordinary to hear that we would have tariffs imposed on us because everybody knows that this country receives about a fifth of Germany's entire car manufacturing output - 820,000 vehicles a year,' he said. 

Former PM Sir John Major joined Mr Cameron and Mrs Harman at a Remain rally in Bristol today

David Cameron and Labour's Harriet Harman visit the premises of sports equipment distributor Shiner in Bristol today as the referendum campaign enters its final frantic stages

Meanwhile, the bosses of more than half of Britain's biggest businesses have urged voters to avoid causing economic chaos by voting to stay in the EU in tomorrow's historic referendum.

In the largest business endorsement of the bitter campaign so far, 1,285 bosses representing 51 of the FTSE 100 firms that a vote to leave the EU would cost jobs, trigger uncertainty and less trade for Britain.

And in a letter in The Times today, the bosses of 1,285 firms that employ 1.75million people write: 'Britain leaving the EU would mean uncertainty for our firms, less trade with Europe and fewer jobs. 

'Britain remaining in the EU would mean the opposite – more certainty, more trade and more jobs. 

'EU membership is good for business and good for British jobs. That's why, on June 23rd, we back Britain remaining in the EU.' 

They claim small businesses and their staff are 'particularly vulnerable' from a Brexit vote.  



Boris Johnson (left) clashed with his successor as London Mayor Sadiq Khan (right) in the referendum debate at Wembley Arena last night



The Wembley Arena debate - the last major TV showdown of the campaign - was staged less than 36 hours before voters finally get their say on Britain's membership of the EU

Pro-EU experts are like Nazi propagandists, says Michael Gove 

Michael Gove has compared economic experts warning about the fall-out of Brexit to the Nazis who orchestrated a smear campaign against Albert Einstein in the 1930s.

The Justice Secretary, who co-chairs the Vote Leave campaign, said experts cannot always be trusted and pointed to the German scientists used to denounce Einstein to back up his point.

He also hinted that he will quit government if voters do not back Brexit in the EU referendum this week, saying he would 'reflect' on the result before deciding his future. 

His comments came as the bosses of more than half of Britain's biggest businesses urged voters to avoid causing economic chaos by voting to stay in the EU in tomorrow's historic referendum. 

Michael Gove (pictured) compared economic experts warning about the fall-out of Brexit to the Nazis who orchestrated a smear campaign against Albert Einstein in the 1930s

In the largest business endorsement of the bitter campaign so far, 1,285 bosses representing 51 of the FTSE 100 firms that a vote to leave the EU would cost jobs, trigger uncertainty and less trade for Britain. 

But according to Mr Gove, voters should shun their advice and recalling the Nazi's treatment of Jewish scientist Einstein during the 1930s, the leading Brexit campaigner told LBC: 'I think the key thing here is to interrogate the assumptions that are made and to ask if these arguments are good.

'We have to be careful about historical comparisons, but Albert Einstein during the 1930s was denounced by the German authorities for being wrong and his theories were denounced, and one of the reasons of course he was denounced was because he was Jewish.

'They got 100 German scientists in the pay of the government to say that he was wrong and Einstein said: 'Look, if I was wrong, one would have been enough.''

Mr Gove added: 'The truth is that if you look at the quality of the analysis, if you look at the facts on the ground, you can come to an appropriate conclusion.

'And the appropriate conclusion, I think, all of us can come to is that with growth rates so low in Europe, with so many unemployed and with the nature of the single currency so damaging, freeing ourselves from that project can only strengthen our economy.'

He made his comments after being challenged over why he is not heeding the advice of many economists who have warned that Brexit could have dire consequences and tip the economy into recession.

The International Monetary Fund, ten Nobel-prize winning economists and the Bank of England have all warned that leaving the EU could damage the economy.

And in an open letter today, the bosses of 1,285 firms that employ 1.75million people write: 'Britain leaving the EU would mean uncertainty for our firms, less trade with Europe and fewer jobs.

 

