EU referendum battle is effectively put on hold until Tuesday as parliament is recalled for tributes on Monday

2016-6-17

The EU referendum battle has been put on hold as a mark of respect following the death of Jo Cox.

The campaigns called a truce as David Cameron and Jeremy Corbyn headed to the scene of the brutal killing to lay flowers and express their outrage.

Activities are likely to be minimal over the weekend and on Monday, when parliament has been recalled so MPs can pay tribute to their colleague. 

Carrying bouquets and accompanied by Commons Speaker John Bercow, the Prime Minister and Leader of the Opposition made a sombre appearance at an impromptu memorial to the late Batley and Spen MP.

Mother-of-two Mrs Cox was repeatedly shot and stabbed to death in broad daylight yesterday lunchtime as she arrived for her regular constituency surgery at Birstall Library.

Following the death of Labour MP Jo Cox (pictured) Boris Johnson abandoned a battle bus tour of East Anglia  yesterday and Prime Minister David Cameron has cancelled a pro-EU rally in Gibraltar

The unprecedented gathering saw Mr Cameron and Mr Corbyn stand shoulder to shoulder to mark the outpouring of grief in Westminster following the shocking killing yesterday.

Mr Cameron said: 'Where we see hatred, where we see division, where we see intolerance we must drive it out of our public life and politics.'

He said: 'If we truly want to honour Jo, then what we should do is recognise that her values - service, community, tolerance - the values she lived by and worked by, those are the values that we need to redouble in our national life in the months and years to come.'

Mr Corbyn said: 'This was an attack on democracy, it was a well of hatred that killed her.'  

Commons Speaker John Bercow said: 'Evil cannot be allowed and will not be allowed to triumph over good.

'We just have to underline our determination as politicians across the spectrum that free speech and the right of people to go about their business and the pursuit of principle will continue, and it will not be dulled or dimmed or cowed in any way by people who think that violence and the spirit of hatred can be allowed to triumph.'

The Prime Minister said the nation was 'rightly shocked' at her death, adding: 'Two children have lost their mother, a husband has lost a loving wife and Parliament has lost one of its most passionate and brilliant campaigners.'

Standing alongside Mr Cameron today, Mr Corbyn said: 'We need our whole society to be secure.

'Jo was brutally murdered here 24 hours ago in this town - a town she loved, a town she grew up in, serving a community she loved.

Pictured arriving for the memorial today were, from left, Mr Benn, Mr Bercow, Mr Cameron, Commons chaplain Reverend Rose Hudson-Wilkin and Mr Corbyn

'And in her life she'd worked for anti-slavery campaigns, she'd worked for Oxfam, she was a campaigner for human rights and justice all around the world.

'She was taken from us in an act of hatred, in a vile act that has killed her.' 





Boris Johnson abandoned a battle bus tour of East Anglia as news of the attack on Mrs Cox filtered through yesterday lunchtime.

David Cameron, who had travelled to Gibraltar, also cancelled a planned pro-EU rally in the overseas territory. 



The Chancellor had been expected to issue a fresh warning about the economic impact of leaving the EU.

Instead he paid tribute to Mrs Cox, saying her campaigning stance on issues such as Syria and refugees had helped ‘transform’ many lives.

Shadow foreign secretary Hilary Benn, Mr Corbyn, Commons Speaker John Bercow and Mr Cameron paused for a moment to pay their respects after placing tributes and making brief remarks 

The Chancellor also highlighted the value of the ‘everyday accessibility’ of MPs to their constituents – and vowed that it would continue despite the ‘injury and intimidation’ faced by some.

He added: ‘People are free in this country to live their lives as they choose and express themselves without fear. Society will protect their right to do so and hold to account those who disregard our laws.

‘Today’s horrible events are an assault on all of these values. But we know that these values, no matter how they have been challenged in the past, have always prevailed.’

Mrs Cox’s violent death is likely to calm the tone of the referendum debate in the final days of campaigning.

US Secretary of State John Kerry described the killing as an ‘assault on democracy’.

Former US Congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords, who survived a shooting in Arizona in 2011, said: ‘Absolutely sickened to hear of the assassination of Jo Cox. She was young, courageous and hardworking. A rising star, mother and wife.’

Former Labour Party leader Ed Miliband said: ‘My heart breaks for the loss of Jo Cox and for Brendan and their kids. She was so full of joy. Words feel hopeless right now.’

Former premier Tony Blair said: ‘Such a pointless and savage act of hatred contradicts everything Jo lived for and worked for. She is a huge loss to British politics.’ 

Tributes grew today at an informal memorial to the late MP on Parliament Square today as scores of flowers were laid around a portrait of the 41-year-old 

