Anti-EU businesswoman forced to quit board of Vote Leave after sharing Islamophobic messages online 

2016-6-21

A Vote Leave board member has quit the campaign after she retweeted a number of anti-Muslim pictures and posts on  social media.

Businesswoman Arabella Arkwright, who runs health clinics and sat on the board and finance committee of the pro-Brexit campaign, stepped down when her online activity  came to light.

Vote Leave accepted her resignation after they saw the retweets and the group said the posts did not reflect the campaign's view.

Businesswoman Arabella Arkwright, (pictured) who runs health clinics and sat on the board and finance committee of the Brexit campaign group, quit  when her online activity  came to light

One of her retweets included an image of a white girl surrounded by people wearing burqas with the caption: 'Britain 2050 "Why didn't you stop them Grandad?'", reports The Guardian. 

Mrs Arkwright has now been removed from the campaign's website and she has deleted her Twitter account following the race row.



It comes after Ukip leader Nigel Farage defended a poster with the slogan 'breaking point' next to a line of refugees making their way across Europe. 

Other retweets on Mrs Arkwright's Twitter account included a link from the founder of the English Defence League, Tommy Robinson, which suggested UK Muslims were attempting to build an Islamic state in Britain.

Meanwhile, another retweeted picture had a 'Stop Islam' badge in the corner and asked people to 'spot the difference' between photographs of Syrian men and Yazidi women fleeing Isis. 

One of her retweets included an image of a white girl surrounded by people wearing burqas with the caption: 'Britain 2050 "Why didn't you stop them Grandad?'"

She has now apologised for her actions but added that she is 'not a political animal' and that she might be 'guilty of being naive'.

Some of the material on her Twitter page was branded racist by Labour MP Emma Reynolds who added that Vote Leave is running a 'nasty' campaign focusing on immigration.

Mrs Arkwright, who is also a partner in a Warwickshire pub and visitor attraction, apologised and told the Guardian that the retweets did not represent her view and that she 'abhorred racism'.

In a statement, she said: 'I would like to make it absolutely clear that my RTs and forwarding do not mean that I endorse in any way the content of them.

'I RT a wide variety of different views on issues related to the referendum with which I do not agree in order that others can see the breadth of opinion on these matters. Is there anything wrong in that?

Another retweered picture had a 'Stop Islam' badge in the corner and asked people to compare photographs of Syrian men and Yazidi women fleeing Isis



'I am not a political animal and maybe am guilty of being naive, but I reject all prejudice and am deeply sorry for any offence that may have been caused. Moreover, perhaps I can be clear, I ABHOR ANY FORM OF RACISM.'    



A Vote Leave spokesman said: 'As soon as we were made aware of these tweets we asked Arabella to hand in her resignation, which she has done with immediate effect. 

'These tweets do not reflect the views of the Vote Leave campaign.' 

Labour MP Ms Reynolds, a member of the Britain Stronger in Europe campaign, said: 'The fact that a member of their board has tweeted and retweeted racist material, including from the founder of the English Defence League, demonstrates the levels to which the Leave campaign has stooped.'

