Britons are 'chippy, ungrateful to Eastern European immigrants, economically illiterate and sad': Luvvies react to Brexit 

2016-6-24

Richard Bacon today blasted people who backed Brexit as 'chippy, inward looking and ungrateful to Eastern European immigrants' as stars had their say on the referendum result.

The broadcaster also said that those who voted to leave the EU were also 'economically illiterate' in a series of barbed tweets.

Harry Potter creator JK Rowling even said she wished for the magic from her books to go back and change the decision.

The author, who lives in Scotland, wrote: 'I don't think I've ever wanted magic more', adding: 'Scotland will seek independence now. Cameron's legacy will be breaking up two unions. Neither needed to happen'.

Scathing: Richard Bacon said today that a Brexit is 'inward looking', 'chippy', and 'ungrateful to Eastern Europeans' and JK Rowling said it will lead to the break-up of the UK 

Stinging: This is Richard Bacon's reaction to the EU referendum vote and said that it was 'economically illiterate' and 'sad' 

Upset: Harry Potter author JK Rowling called for magic to reverse the decision that shook British establishment

Blame game: David Cameron was accused of breaking up two Unions without ever needed to do so 

Trend: Stars including Daisy Lowe have been sharing this Remain image showing the EU stars with one replaced by a teardrop

Other stars also rushed to criticise the decision to leave.

James Corden wrote: 'I can't get my head around what's happening in Britain. I'm so sorry to the youth of Britain. I fear you've been let down today'.

In a play on words BBC star Gary Lineker tweeted: 'U kip for a couple of hours and look what happens. What have we gone and done?'

He added later: 'We should maybe change the "Union Jack" to "I'm alright Jack".' 

Model Alexa Chung tweeted a broken heart emoji while Boy George wrote: 'There's no use crying over spilt milk. We'll just ave (sic) to mek (sic) the best of it!'. 

Another star to speak out was Niall Horan of boy band One Direction - who was not previously known for his political activism.

The 22-year-old singer, who is from Ireland but has been based in Britain since he appeared on The X Factor in 2010, singled out Nigel Farage for criticism as he expressed his upset at the result.

'It's a sad day,' Horan wrote on Twitter. 'The economic impact that this is going to have is definitely going to make those voters regret their decision.

'And I see Farage is talking c**p and telling lies as per usual on telly. Let's see what he does now. He really is a terrible man.

'How can you sway that many people into thinking their health service is going to be funded and when the vote goes your way tell them we shouldn't have said that and it was a mistake? Bulls***.' 



Messages: James Corden said the youth of Britain has been let down - Gary Lineker cited the influence if Ukip and said: 'What have we gone and done?' 





 

Sentiment: Model Alexa Chung tweeted a simple heartbroken emoji as she joined the long queue of stars to tweet  

Singer Lily Allen also took to Twitter to vent her fury and desperation at the result of the Brexit vote.

She posted: 'Well Millennials. We're really f*****.' 

While some celebrities tweeted their despair at the notion of a Brexit, comedians made light of the situation with Ricky Gervais, Hugh Laurie and Frankie Boyle all cracking wise.

Remarking on the resignation of Prime Minister David Cameron, Gervais wrote: 'Relax. Boris Johnson is going to take over now.'

While Laurie focused on the effect the Brexit will have on Britons attending Euro 2016, by writing: 'First hairline crack in the plasterwork: England fans will be paying 25 quid for a bottle of beer by Monday.'

Scottish stand-up Boyle joked that Britons should look for a new home, he said: 'It's important to accept the result and move on, possibly to a new country.'



Rant: One Direction star Niall Horan vented his fury about the Leave campaign on Twitter earlier today



Monthy Python legend Eric Idle remained deadpan and suggested that British Leave voters had made a rod for their own backs.



He simply posted: 'UK. Foot. Shot.'

Millionaire businessman and Apprentice boss Alan Sugar also tweeted his concern about the Brexit.

In particular Lord Sugar spoke of  the financial effects that the country's exit from the EU could have, he wrote: 'I just woke to hear we are out of the EU. Shocked to say the least. I fear for the future. Markets collapsed lets hope temporary.'

Artists, actors and musicians including Benedict Cumberbatch and Helena Bonham Carter  signed a 'luvvies' letter' claiming leaving the EU would make Britain ‘less imaginative’. 



The warning was signed by 250 of Britain's celebrities and says if Britain were to leave the European Union it would become ‘an outsider shouting from the wings’.







Gallows humour: Comedians took to Twitter to share their views on the Brexit, with standup Frankie Boyle announcing that it may be time to leave the country

Among other signatories were the singer Paloma Faith, 50 Shades of Grey director Sam Taylor-Wood, Trainspotting director Danny Boyle, 12 Years a Slave star Chiwetel Ejiofor and The Wire actor Dominic West.

Tracey Emin, Steve Coogan, Sir Patrick Stewart, Dame Kristin Scott Thomas, Keira Knightley, Jude Law, Eddie Izzard, Bill Nighy, Jenny Agutter and Jessie Ware have also signed.

These so-called 'cultural stars' also warned a Brexit vote could undermine the creative arts, pointing out many of them worked on projects supported by EU money.

Brexit would also undermine ‘collaborating across borders’ they said in a letter to the Guardian before the vote.

'From the smallest gallery to the biggest blockbuster, many of us have worked on projects that would never have happened without vital EU funding or by collaborating across borders,' the letter says.

Concern: Lord Alan Sugar tweeted that he was worried about what the future could hold after a Brexit

'Britain is not just stronger in Europe, it is more imaginative and more creative, and our global creative success would be severely weakened by walking away.

'From the Bard to Bowie, British creativity inspires and influences the rest of the world,' it says.

'We believe that being part of the EU bolsters Britain's leading role on the world stage.'

'And what would 'out' really mean? Leaving Europe would be a leap into the unknown for millions of people across the UK who work in the creative industries, and for the millions more at home and abroad who benefit from the growth and vibrancy of Britain's cultural sector.'

The letter was organised by Britain Stronger in Europe, the official campaign to persuade voters to remain in the EU. 



