Will Boris grab the crown? Dream ticket with Gove could replace Cameron and Osborne... but plot to stop him is brewing 

2016-6-24

Boris Johnson and Michael Gove could stand on a Brexit ‘dream ticket’ in the race to succeed David Cameron in Downing Street.

Mr Johnson was installed as odds-on favourite to replace Mr Cameron yesterday after leading the stunning campaign to get Britain out of the EU.

Last night there was speculation he could run on a ticket with Mr Gove, who is credited with being the brains behind the Leave strategy. In this scenario, Mr Gove would be installed as Chancellor and lead the detailed negotiations on Brexit.

Boris Johnson and Michael Gove could stand on a Brexit ‘dream ticket’ in the race to succeed David Cameron in Downing Street

But the former London mayor faces concerted opposition from Cameron loyalists at Westminster. One former minister last night said discussions had begun on identifying a ‘stop Boris’ candidate, with Home Secretary Theresa May emerging as a likely favourite.

Mrs May, who appeared to be a reluctant supporter of Remain, is said to be in talks with the arch-Eurosceptic Liam Fox about launching a rival ticket.

The respected home secretary, who was a quiet supporter of remain, is being offered support to try and unify the party - and beat the former London mayor.

While Mrs May has been praised for her long service in one of the toughest cabinet roles, many MPs do not see her as a 'team player'. 

Tory women in particular have complained in the past that Mrs May did not dine with them when the Commons sat late. However insiders now believe she could be the safe pair of hands to halt Mr Johnson.  

Meanwhile Ken Clarke, the former Cabinet minister, said Mr Cameron should be replaced by people who were 'ready to deliver the serious business of government', a dig at Boris Johnson.

Mr Clarke, a keen supporter of the EU, told the BBC's Newsnight he had to count to ten when discussing Brexit to work out 'what the devil' happens next.

In his victory speech yesterday, two hours after Mr Cameron announced he was stepping down, Mr Johnson said Britain could have a ‘glorious future’ outside the EU

'We have a caretaker government. We have no policy of any kind on what our relationship will be with the outside world and Europe in particular.' He added that 'the British have caused a crisis for half the western world' by voting out of the EU.'  



Until recently, Mr Johnson had lacked the parliamentary party backing to stand as leader. He was seen as remote and out of touch when he came back to the Commons after two terms at City Hall. However his support for Brexit catapulted him to becoming the favourite to succeed Mr Cameron.

Mr Johnson yesterday refused to take questions about his leadership ambitions. He is said to have been taken aback by both the scale of the win and the decision of the Prime Minister to resign immediately.

In his victory speech yesterday, two hours after Mr Cameron announced he was stepping down, Mr Johnson said Britain could have a ‘glorious future’ outside the EU.

Hinting at how he might pitch his future leadership, he reached out to young voters who backed Remain in large numbers, saying: ‘It is the essence of our case that young people in this country can look forward to a more secure and more prosperous future if we take back the democratic control which is the foundation of our economic prosperity.’

Mr Johnson also insisted Brexit would not mean ‘somehow pulling up the drawbridge, because I think the very opposite is true’.

He added: ‘In the end this decision is about the people, the right of people in this country to settle their own destiny. The very principles of our democracy, the rights of all of us to elect and remove the people who make the key decisions in their lives.’

His father Stanley, who played a prominent role in the Remain campaign, said he had ‘total confidence’ in his son’s ability to make a good prime minister, adding: ‘Anybody who wins the Brackenbury scholarship at Balliol is certainly qualified to be prime minister.’

Boris Johnson read Classics at Oxford University’s Balliol College, from 1983 to 1987. At that time, scholarships were of nominal value and were awarded to those considered to have outstanding academic ability.

Mr Cameron yesterday fired the starting gun on a three-month leadership contest by announcing he would stand down at the Tories’ October conference. His decision could spark a General Election within the next 12 months, with his successor likely to want to take advantage of Labour’s feeble state to secure their own mandate.

A TNS poll yesterday showed 50 per cent of voters would expect a new Tory leader to hold an election, compared with 22 per cent who think it is unnecessary.

Bookmaker William Hill immediately installed Mr Johnson as 4/5 favourite to succeed his old friend and rival. Mrs May was given odds of 3/1, while Mr Gove was on 5/1. Mr Gove is popular with party activists, but has repeatedly said he has no interest in being PM. He has forged a close relationship with Mr Johnson during the campaign and many Tories predict the two men will stand on a joint ticket.

Chancellor George Osborne, who was favourite before the referendum began, has drifted to distant odds of 12/1, after masterminding a campaign which infuriated many Tories by ramping up claims about the threat to the economy of leaving the EU.

The history of Tory leadership contests suggests they are rarely won by the initial favourite, and a number of other candidates are considering throwing their hats in the ring.

One former minister last night said discussions had begun on identifying a ‘stop Boris’ candidate, with Home Secretary Theresa May emerging as a likely favourite

Work and Pensions Secretary Stephen Crabb is said to have teamed up with Health Secretary Jeremy Hunt to make a run for the leadership. Mr Crabb is unusual among Tory MPs in having a working-class background, and is seen as a moderniser. But he opposed Brexit and is currently priced at 20/1.

Pro-Remain Education Secretary Nicky Morgan is also thought to be considering a run for the leadership, despite enjoying little popularity among Tory activists.

But many Tory MPs believe the next leader will have to be a Brexit supporter in order to successfully lead EU negotiations. Veteran Conservative MP Sir Bill Cash said: ‘Whoever is in No 10 needs to be absolutely committed to Brexit.’ Fellow Tory Andrew Bridgen said the next leader has ‘got to be someone from the Brexit camp’.

Energy minister Andrea Leadsom, who had a prominent role in the Brexit campaign, is priced at 10/1, and employment minister Priti Patel, a fellow Brexiteer, has odds of 16/1.

Graham Brady, chairman of the backbench 1922 Committee of Tory MPs, is expected to set a timetable for the contest next week.

Under Tory rules, MPs whittle the field of candidates down to two in a series of secret ballots at Westminster. The two candidates are then voted on by the 150,000 Tory members. Most MPs believe Mr Johnson would win comfortably if his name is put to the country. Some opponents believe he could be stopped by keeping him off the final ballot.

By ANDREW PIERCE

Boris Johnson



Eton old-boy BoJo is a clear favourite at 4-5, has won the London mayoralty twice and led the successful Leave campaign.

The former journalist and MP for Uxbridge and South Ruislip, 52, has been married twice – to Allegra Mostyn-Owen from 1987 to 1993; and then, since 1993, to Marina Wheeler QC.

The dad of six (five with Marina) has written biographies of great Britons such as Churchill and Shakespeare.

He is instantly recognisable, with a carefully cultivated shambolic appearance. Bozza reaches parts of the electorate that other Tories can’t. But his low point came when he lied to his party leader, saying he wasn’t having an affair with journalist Petronella Wyatt which resulted in two abortions.

Clever Australian strategist Lynton Crosby will advise him on his leadership campaign.

Michael Gove



The former Times senior editor, married to Daily Mail columnist Sarah Vine, is impeccably polite but can also be abrasive and boasts a wicked sense of humour.

Third-favourite contender and full-on Eurosceptic, Justice Secretary ‘The Gover’ was adopted by his Labour-supporting family in Aberdeen where he grew up before going on to study at Oxford.

The MP for Surrey Heath has a son and daughter with Sarah and says he’s ‘proud to be a Christian’. Mr Gove has even enjoyed minor acting roles.

The Queens Park Rangers fan, 48, was the intellectual heartbeat of the Leave campaign. But he was demoted as Education Secretary by his friend David Cameron who feared he was too ‘toxic’ a figure to teachers and parents. 

And he once baffled colleagues when he let his mobile phone play a Beyonce track. His trump card though, is his powerful back story: a close relationship with his adopted mother and her fish merchant husband.

Theresa May



Nicknamed Karla after novelist John Le Carre’s inscrutable spymaster, the MP for Maidenhead has a reputation for being humourless.

But the Oxford-educated only child of an Anglican clergyman is reliable and clear-sighted enough to make difficult choices.

That makes the Home Secretary, 59, the second-favourite with odds of 3-1 – and while she backed Remain, she was expected to switch to Leave.

Church-going Mrs May was a financial consultant at the Bank of England and is married to banker Philip.

They have no children. She is famed for her shoe cupboard of Russell and Bromley’s finest – her favourite is a pair of a leopard-print kitten heels.

While her career high-point was her blistering speech to the Police Federation vowing to break their power in 2014, she made an almighty gaffe in 2002 by saying that the Conservatives were seen as ‘the nasty party’. It was a label used for years by their enemies. But her secret weapon is the 68-strong sisterhood of women Tory MPs.

Nicky Morgan



Privately-educated corporate lawyer Mrs Morgan, 43, was made Education Secretary after only ten months as an MP. Critics called it over-promotion.

The MP for Loughborough, a devout Christian, was dubbed Miss U-turn after a series of embarrassing policy reversals.

And the keen jogger went from voting against gay marriage to supporting it.

She was also accused of misleading Parliament by saying a third of children under Labour had left primary school unable to read or write. In fact, closer to 90 per cent could read or write.

Mrs Morgan. who has an eight-year- old son with her architect husband Jonathan, is a Europhile with zero chance of success. Chivalrously, bookies say she’s 33-1. 



 

