'So where is David Cameron anyway?' Voters call out PM amid deafening silence from Remain leaders on the brink of Brexit

2016-6-24

As the UK looked set to vote for a Brexit in the historic EU referendum, David Cameron and leaders of the Remain campaign remained conspicuously silent.

While key players in the Leave campaign spoke to supporters and broadcasters through the night, the Prime Minister, Jeremy Corbyn and George Osborne were nowhere to be seen. 

Ukip leader Nigel Farage gave a number of television speeches and interviews, declaring Britain as being on the brink of independence shortly after 4am.

Laying low: David Cameron was seen leaving a polling station with his wife Samantha on Thursday



Questions: Voters took to Twitter to ask why the Prime Minister was missing from Remain events overnight

The Prime Minister was seen leaving a polling station with his wife Samantha early on Thursday, but he did not appear publicly at any of the Remain parties being held across the country.



Voters took to Twitter to call out the Prime Minister, asking where he was 'on such an important night in history'.

Another asked: 'Where IS Jeremy Corbyn? Where IS David Cameron. Have they both fled the country.' 

Projections showed the Brexit campaign was set to prevail in the historic referendum despite massive support for Remain in London and Scotland.

Speaking out: Meanwhile Nigel Farage appeared at a number of events in support of the Leave campaign



Deafening silence: Jeremy Corbyn, David Cameron and George Osborne have all failed to appear overnight

The direction of the battle started to become clear with a shock result in Sunderland which saw Leave win by 61 per cent to 39 per cent.

A surprise victory for Brexit in Swansea, where the pro-EU side had been expecting to romp home, was then followed by a series of other strong showings.

With around a quarter of the declarations in, analysts and betting markets are now forecasting that the Leave campaign will come out on top.

The Pound - which soared in value earlier after Mr Farage admitted he thought Brexit had lost - has nose-dived against US dollar by more than 10 cents. 







