Nearly half a million less jobs, 5% lower GDP and £40bn black hole in the public finances: Osborne's Brexit by numbers as he issues stark warning to leave voters  

2016-6-18

On Thursday, I was sitting in my study in Number 11, finishing writing the speech I was planning to give to the annual Mansion House dinner, when a colleague came in to tell me that Jo Cox MP had been attacked.

Like so many others, I watched the news hoping and praying for the best and then feeling numb with shock when the terrible news came through that Jo had died.

Looking at the beautiful photo that her husband, Brendan, posted of Jo, my first thoughts were about the senseless loss of a young woman’s life and for the two children who had lost their mother. Then it began to sink in that her murder was also an assault on the values that have made Great Britain great: freedom, liberty, tolerance, Parliamentary democracy itself.

Chancellor George Osborne predicts economic ruin if the nation votes in favour of Brexit on Thursday 

So that evening, I tore up the economic speech I was going to give and instead addressed the appalling loss of Jo Cox.

Campaigning in the EU referendum was suspended on both sides as a mark of respect for Jo. Today it restarts, as we engage in the democratic debate that she so proudly served.

Jo campaigned on many important causes in her short time in Parliament – from banishing modern slavery to helping the families displaced by the conflict in Syria.

But her last political platform was on the Thames, where her family – Brendan and their two small children – joined a flotilla flying flags for Remain.

We each have the same one vote in this referendum. And there are strong feelings on both sides.

But I hope, in Jo’s memory, that the campaign can be conducted between now and Thursday in less divisive a tone than we have seen so far. Let’s have less inflammatory rhetoric and baseless assertion, and more facts and reasoned argument.

Today, I want to make the argument about our place in Europe that I would have made to the Mansion House.

We’ve fought hard to get this country growing again. This week we learned of a record number of people in work and unemployment at an 11-year low. Wages are rising, living standards are going up, and we can fund increases for the NHS and defence.

Mr Osborne said he tore up an economic speech he was due to deliver on Thursday following Jo Cox's murder

I am not saying everything is perfect in our economy, but I see no evidence that quitting the EU will solve any problems we have. Is there too much red tape for business? Yes, but the Dutch have less red tape and manage to achieve that inside the EU. Do we need to sell more to places like China? Yes, but the Germans sell three times more than we do to China and they are inside the EU. Do we pool our sovereignty inside the EU? Yes, but we do in NATO and the UN too, because it gives us more not less control over our lives.

The one thing everyone is agreed on is that quitting the EU would bring us a lot more uncertainty. Many believe it could take us a decade to exit.

A decade of firms not knowing the trading arrangements with our largest markets; when small firms aren’t sure what standards their products should meet; when big investors into Britain think twice whether they invest any more.

This is what companies like Hitachi and Rolls-Royce and entrepreneurs like Richard Branson and Bill Gates are spelling out for us.

In the past 72 hours, we’ve heard from impeccably independent institutions set up precisely to warn us about economic risks. The Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee said voting to leave the EU could lead to a sharp fall in sterling, higher prices, lower growth and rising unemployment and is the largest immediate risk facing not just Britain’s financial markets, but global markets too.

The International Monetary Fund estimated Britain’s GDP could be over five per cent lower; inflation over one per cent higher; wages would be depressed and unemployment could rise by 1.4 per cent.

That’s 440,000 more out of work; 440,000 families who’ve lost their economic security. The respected Institute for Fiscal Studies says this kind of hit to the economy means less money coming into the Treasury and so less money for public services.

There would be a hole in the public finances of between £20 billion to £40 billion. A permanent hole that would have to be filled by higher taxes and spending cuts.

So what has been the Leave campaign’s response to this? Down with the experts! We don’t want to hear the facts.

It means we shouldn’t listen to people who know what they’re talking about; we should only listen to those who don’t.

I find this deeply troubling. Never before in British politics has independent, impartial, expert analysis been so necessary. If we quit the EU, there is no going back. We can’t turn around in a couple of years and say: we’ve made a mistake; please let us back in. The referendum is also about who we are as a country.

It was Winston Churchill who said: ‘A nation that forgets its past has no future.’

Engagement with the world and a free trading spirit are woven into the fabric of our nation. Britons have made friends, built alliances and traded all across Europe, spilled blood in the cause of freedom on our Continent.

It was our thinkers and philosophers who developed theories of free trade, and our political leaders who were the first in the world to put them into practice. It was Britain that helped create the Council of Europe in 1949 as our Continent reeled from the horrors of the Nazis; Britain which built the single market championed by Margaret Thatcher, perhaps the greatest achievement of free trade in the history of the world.

That’s why I believe so profoundly, with all my heart, that a vote to Leave the EU would be the most terrible mistake for our country.

And it would not be in keeping with who we are as a people. Not the British way. When something isn’t perfect, like the EU, we get stuck in trying to improve it. We are not quitters.

So I say to people weighing up how to vote on Thursday. Stop and think. If there’s any doubt in your mind, don’t take the risk with an irreversible vote to Leave.

Instead, let’s heed Churchill’s advice, and not forget our past. Let’s vote to Remain. Let’s be Great Britain, our great democracy.

 

