'We're like rats in a sack': Senior Tory warns infighting over the EU referendum has been 'hugely damaging' to the country and party

2016-6-16

Graham Brady today warned his Conservative colleagues they had to reunite after next week's referendum

Tory MPs were warned today they must accept the referendum result and reunite for the sake of the country after next week's referendum.

Graham Brady, the chairman of the 1922 Committee of Conservative MPs, said the bitter infighting over the referendum had made the party look like 'rats in a sack'. 

He warned today it is an 'ineffective' way of making a political case and said voters would not support a divided party.

In a column for the Telegraph, Mr Brady said: 'The whole point of politics in a democracy is that it is all about the people, not those who are temporarily entrusted with the task of government.

'Surely in a referendum with the future of our democracy at its heart, that is truer than ever?'

Mr Brady is responsible for collecting and protecting letters from Conservatives MPs demanding a vote of confidence in the Tory leader until he has enough - 50 - to trigger a challenge.

And he said the party should make 'no apology for the fact we have passionate disagreements' over the European issue.

But he said: 'Most importantly, all Conservatives who are engaged in this debate in the remaining days should strain every sinew to rediscover a habit of courtesy and respect.'

Mr Brady said both sides must accept the other was in the fight for the right reasons and then accept the verdict of the British people next week.

He warned: 'The case that is put may sometimes be shrill or extreme but if we don’t accept that the driving force behind it is a genuine desire to serve the public good, it will be impossible for us to work together after June 23.

'When the gun smoke clears, there will still be a job to be done, a government to be run and elections to be won. The winning team must be magnanimous in victory; the losing side dignified in defeat.'







Tory MP Glyn Davies endorsed the call from Mr Brady today.

He said: 'Every person who values and cares about the Conservative Party should read Graham Brady's column.'

Tory backbencher Glyn Davies appealed to his colleagues to read and take on board the observations of the 1922 committee chairman Mr Brady today 

David Cameron has insisted he will not have a long term falling out with Michael Gove and Boris Johnson over the campaign.

Last night he told Channel 4 News: 'We all supported a referendum. We’ll accept the judgement of the British people and we’ll have to come back together afterwards.

'And there’s a huge government programme of life chances, reforming prisons, reforming schools, investing in childcare, creating a seven-day NHS.

'There’s huge challenges to overcome and I think you’ll be surprised how politicians can have an argument, have that decided and then get on with the other things about which they by and large agree.'

David Cameron, pictured at a referendum event with Welsh first minister Carwyn Jones last night, has insisted the Tory party can come back together after the referendum and govern together 

