Bojo for PM? Now Cameron has resigned we look at the Tory stars whose names are in the mix 

2016-6-24

Within four months, David Cameron will have left Number 10 and the UK will have a new Prime Minister for the first time since 2010.

The country's leader will be the winner of the Conservative leadership election, decided by Tory MPs and members.

Here is MailOnline's guide to the runners and riders in the contest... 

BORIS JOHNSON

The overwhelming favorite going into the contest, the former Mayor of London has led the Vote Leave campaign to an improbable victory.

Declaring for Brexit in February cemented the Uxbridge MP as a darling of the Tory right and he seems certain to make the shortlist.

Johnson has a celebrity unique among British politicians but despite eight years running the capital, he will have a big job to do to persuade the country he is up to leading the country.

Odds: 4/6

Stars: Boris Johnson and Theresa May are considered among the frontrunners to be the next Prime Minister

THERESA MAY

After six years as Home Secretary, Theresa May is the sober, serious choice - and probably the strongest 'continuity candidate' who could succeed Cameron.

May has become the longest serving Home Secretary, thriving in a brief which has proved the graveyard for many a political career.

Tough, a safe pair of hands and widely respected - if not always seen fondly - May could be the anti-Boris.

Odds: 11/4

GEORGE OSBORNE

The Chancellor of the Exchequer has long been the heir-apparent to David Cameron.

The Prime Minister's deputy and close ally has spent six years in Number 11, is credited by many in the Tory Party for rescuing the economy and is a prized tactician.

But his leadership bid has almost certainly been crashed off the tracks by a catastrophic Budget in March and his role standing shoulder to shoulder with the PM during the referendum campaign.

Odds: 25/1

Ministers: George Osborne and Stephen Crabb are considered to be more outside bets

STEPHEN CRABB

Perhaps the biggest unknown in the race, the Work and Pensions Secretary was parachuted into the top of front line politics as the replacement for Iain Duncan Smith after his bombshell resignation over the Budget.

Crabb, a Welsh son of a broken home, could be the leading One Nation candidate in the leadership race.

Being a new name - and one who was quiet in the referendum - could allow Crabb to define himself a unifying candidate.

Odds: 25/1

RUTH DAVIDSON

The Leader of the Scottish Conservatives arrives at the contest having pulled off the near miracle of overhauling Labour to take second in Scotland.

Davidson was a star of the referendum campaign for her combative appearance at the final TV debate and as someone a million miles from the old Etonian Tory which has proven toxic with much of the electorate she would be prized by the One Nation wing of the party.

Her candidacy is a longshot - not least because she is not an MP and has a huge job opposing Nicola Sturgeon in Holyrood. But on the day Britain backed Brexit is anything impossible?

Odds: 33/1

Contrast: The fellow Scots Ruth Davidson and Liam Fox backed different sides in the EU referendum

LIAM FOX

A heavyweight with Cabinet experience, Fox has run for the leadership before - and lost.

But he is extremely popular on the right of the party and played a leading role in referendum campaign, appearing with different parts of the Leave movement.

The former Defence Secretary is known to have a war chest ready and waiting for the leadership campaign and is well connected on the Tory benches.

While it is perhaps hard to see a route onto the final shortlist, Fox would undoubtedly be well-organised and a fearsome candidate.

Odds: 25/1

MICHAEL GOVE

As one of the leaders of the Leave campaign, the Justice Secretary has become a major voice in the referendum debate who could rally pro-Brexit members while retaining strong links with Cameron's own followers.

He also has a reputation as a radical reformer with the ability to cross political lines, and has drawn praise for his liberal approach to prison reform.

However, he has insisted he has no interest in the top job - and he may be regarded as too divisive to be leader, given his unpopularity as Education Secretary.

Odds: 7/1

Experienced: Michael Gove and Nicky Morgan have both served as Education Secretary under Cameron

NICKY MORGAN

Gove's replacement as Education Secretary is respected for the way she stopped the topic becoming a hot-button issue in last year's Election.

She has few enemies at Westminster, and as a centrist woman who is a relatively new MP she could be a breath of fresh air for the party.

But although friends have said she is considering running, she may well conclude she is not sufficiently well-known to take on the more high-profile contenders.

Odds: 33/1

SAJID JAVID

The Business Secretary, a former investment banker, is admired by many for his smooth style and was the first of the 2010 intake of MPs to make it into the Cabinet.

Many pro-Brexit MPs were upset with his decision to back Remain, claiming that he went against his own instincts in order to suck up to Downing Street.

But if Osborne decides he cannot win, it is possible that Javid would stand as his 'surrogate' in order to continue the current leadership's centrist, pro-business agenda.

Odds: 25/1

Outsiders: Sajid Javid, Andrea Leadsom and Priti Patel are all possible leadership contenders

ANDREA LEADSOM

Leadsom, a junior Minister for Energy who previously worked in the Treasury, is relatively obscure among the public at large.

But her profile has received a huge boost during the EU referendum campaign, where she has been regarded as one of Leave's most impressive voices.

As one of the least divisive pro-Brexit Tory politicians, she could be an outside bet to be the compromise candidate for MPs to rally around.

Odds: 14/1

PRITI PATEL

The Employment Minister has long been tipped as a contender for the leadership one day - she combines an unorthodox background with staunch Right-wing views.

Patel, 44, is the daughter of Ugandan immigrants who ran a successful chain of newsagents.

She was a vocal campaigner for Leave, and has adopted socially conservative causes such as banning prisoners from having the vote.

However, those close to her have reportedly said that she will not stand, saying: 'We've made enough history for one week.'

Odds: 20/1

The leadership election is a two-stage process - first Conservative MPs have their say, then members of the party all around the country are able to vote.

If there are two or more candidates, all Tory MPs vote on who they prefer, with the bottom candidate in each round being eliminated until only two are left.

The final two then make their pitch to members of the party in a straight head-to-head contest, with the winner determined by postal voting.

The exact timescale is unclear, but David Cameron said today that he wants his successor in place by the time of the party conference in October, meaning that the process will have to begin within weeks.

Only full members of the party who pay their £25 subscription are entitled to vote - unlike in Labour's leadership contest, where supporters could register for just £3.



