The end of George Osborne? Chancellor is set to walk or be axed after gambling his political career on 'Project Fear' 

2016-6-24

George Osborne's political career looks all-but over tonight after his 'Project Fear' warnings of economic chaos if Britain voted for Brexit failed to scare voters into backing Remain. 

Responding to the shock win for Leave this morning the Chancellor tweeted he will do 'all I can to make it work'. 

But he gambled his own career and economic legacy in the final days before the EU referendum last week by warning voters that he'd have to present an emergency budget after a Brexit vote to plug a £30billion hole in the public finances. 

George Osborne's political career looks all-but over tonight after his 'Project Fear' warnings of economic chaos if Britain voted for Brexit failed to scare voters into backing Remain

He claimed he would be forced to break key Tory election pledges to protect NHS, defence and education spending while also warning of 2p hikes in income tax in an extraordinary 'punishment' Budget. 

But Brexit campaigners likened his warnings to bribery and dozens of Tory MPs vowed to axe Mr Osborne if Britain backed Brexit. 



Having generated such strong animosity with Tory colleagues, Mr Osborne will struggle to survive and any move to stay on could lead backbench rebels to vote down a future Budget. 

The unprecedented backlash against the Chancellor last week from more than 60 of his own colleagues was the most vicious Blue-on-Blue clashes of the campaign. 







Responding to the shock win for Leave this morning the Chancellor tweeted he will do 'all I can to make it work'.

A remarkable 65 people publicly put their name to a letter saying his position as Chancellor would be 'untenable' if he tried to impose an emergency budget of huge spending cuts and tax rises. 

Today Mr Osborne did not make an appearance publicly as he was locked in emergency meetings with Treasury officials, Bank of England staff and discussions with European Central Bank over their contingency plans for reacting to the Brexit vote. 

The leadership election is a two-stage process - first Conservative MPs have their say, then members of the party all around the country are able to vote.

If there are two or more candidates, all Tory MPs vote on who they prefer, with the bottom candidate in each round being eliminated until only two are left.

The final two then make their pitch to members of the party in a straight head-to-head contest, with the winner determined by postal voting.

The exact timescale is unclear, but David Cameron said today that he wants his successor in place by the time of the party conference in October, meaning that the process will have to begin within weeks.

Only full members of the party who pay their £25 subscription are entitled to vote - unlike in Labour's leadership contest, where supporters could register for just £3.

He said central banks across the G7 have taken action to ensure the proper functioning of financial markets. 

Mr Osborne said he had briefed G7 finance ministers and bank governors on the outcome of the vote and that the Bank of England and the Treasury were 'monitoring the situation closely'.

He revealed details of his day's engagements on Twitter, writing in a series of posts: 'They all respect the decision of the British people. 

'G7 central banks have taken steps to ensure adequate liquidity and to support functioning of markets.'

He added: 'It was a hard fought campaign. It is not the outcome I wanted but I respect decision of British people and will do all I can to make it work.'  

Other key figures under threat after today's dramatic events include Matthew Hancock, a key Osborne ally who is currently minister for the Cabinet Office and Paymaster General. 

Amber Rudd, the Energy Secretary who is close to both Osborne and Cameron, could also lose her job after attacking Boris Johnson so viciously in a key EU TV debate. 

She branded Mr Johnson a liar obsessed with becoming PM and jibed that he was 'not the man you want to drive you home at the end of the evening' in what was seen as the most personal attack of the campaign.  

As for next Tory leader, up to a dozen candidates could throw their hats into the ring.

Stars: Boris Johnson and Theresa May are considered among the frontrunners to be the next Prime Minister

Mr Johnson is the overwhelming favorite going into the contest after leading the Vote Leave campaign to an improbable victory.

Declaring for Brexit in February cemented the Uxbridge MP as a darling of the Tory right and he seems certain to make the shortlist.

Johnson has a celebrity unique among British politicians but despite eight years running the capital, he will have a big job to do to persuade the country he is up to leading the country. His odds are 4/6.  

After six years as Home Secretary, Theresa May is the sober, serious choice - and probably the strongest 'continuity candidate' who could succeed Cameron.

May has become the longest serving Home Secretary, thriving in a brief which has proved the graveyard for many a political career.

Tough, a safe pair of hands and widely respected - if not always seen fondly - May could be the anti-Boris. Her odds are 11/4.   



Ministers: George Osborne and Stephen Crabb (above) are considered to be more outside bets

Perhaps the biggest unknown in the race, the Work and Pensions Secretary was parachuted into the top of front line politics as the replacement for Iain Duncan Smith after his bombshell resignation over the Budget.

Crabb, a Welsh son of a broken home, could be the leading One Nation candidate in the leadership race.

Being a new name - and one who was quiet in the referendum - could allow Crabb to define himself a unifying candidate. But his odds are far out, at 25/1.  



Ruth Davidson, the Leader of the Scottish Conservatives,  pulled off the near miracle of overhauling Labour to take second in Scotland and in doing so has parachuted herself up the leadership rankings. 

She was a star of the referendum campaign for her combative appearance at the final TV debate and as someone a million miles from the old Etonian Tory which has proven toxic with much of the electorate she would be prized by the One Nation wing of the party.

Her candidacy is a longshot - not least because she is not an MP and has a huge job opposing Nicola Sturgeon in Holyrood and her odds are 33/1. 

Contrast: The fellow Scots Ruth Davidson and Liam Fox backed different sides in the EU referendum

Liam Fox is a heavyweight with Cabinet experience and has run for the leadership before - and lost.

But he is extremely popular on the right of the party and played a leading role in referendum campaign, appearing with different parts of the Leave movement.

The former Defence Secretary is known to have a war chest ready and waiting for the leadership campaign and is well connected on the Tory benches.

While it is perhaps hard to see a route onto the final shortlist, Fox would undoubtedly be well-organised and a fearsome candidate. His odds are the same as Mr Crabbs - at 25/1.  



As one of the leaders of the Leave campaign, the Justice Secretary Michael Gove has become a major voice in the referendum debate who could rally pro-Brexit members while retaining strong links with Cameron's own followers.

He also has a reputation as a radical reformer with the ability to cross political lines, and has drawn praise for his liberal approach to prison reform.

However, he has insisted he has no interest in the top job - and he may be regarded as too divisive to be leader, given his unpopularity as Education Secretary. His odds are just 7/1.  

Experienced: Michael Gove and Nicky Morgan have both served as Education Secretary under Cameron

Gove's replacement as Education Secretary is respected for the way she stopped the topic becoming a hot-button issue in last year's Election.

She has few enemies at Westminster, and as a centrist woman who is a relatively new MP she could be a breath of fresh air for the party.

But although friends have said she is considering running, she may well conclude she is not sufficiently well-known to take on the more high-profile contenders. Her odds are at 33/1.  

The Business Secretary Sajid Javid, a former investment banker, is admired by many for his smooth style and was the first of the 2010 intake of MPs to make it into the Cabinet.

Many pro-Brexit MPs were upset with his decision to back Remain, claiming that he went against his own instincts in order to suck up to Downing Street.

But if Osborne decides he cannot win, it is possible that Javid would stand as his 'surrogate' in order to continue the current leadership's centrist, pro-business agenda. His odds are 25/1.

Outsiders: Sajid Javid, Andrea Leadsom and Priti Patel are all possible leadership contenders

Andrea Leadsom, a junior Minister for Energy who previously worked in the Treasury, is relatively obscure among the public at large.

But her profile has received a huge boost during the EU referendum campaign, where she has been regarded as one of Leave's most impressive voices.

As one of the least divisive pro-Brexit Tory politicians, she could be an outside bet to be the compromise candidate for MPs to rally around. Her odds of becoming leader are 14/1.   

The Employment Minister Priti Patel has long been tipped as a contender for the leadership one day - she combines an unorthodox background with staunch Right-wing views.

Patel, 44, is the daughter of Ugandan immigrants who ran a successful chain of newsagents.

She was a vocal campaigner for Leave, and has adopted socially conservative causes such as banning prisoners from having the vote.

However, those close to her have reportedly said that she will not stand, saying: 'We've made enough history for one week.' Her odds are 25/1.  

 

 

