Hundreds queue outside foreign exchange shops to 'panic buy' euros and dollars over fears that vote for Brexit could hit sterling

2016-6-22

Queues formed outside foreign exchange shops yesterday as Britons rushed to buy currency ahead of the EU referendum vote.



Most forecasters expect the pound to fall sharply if there is a vote to leave the EU on Thursday, which would weaken the spending power of British holidaymakers abroad.

Sterling's value has fluctuated wildly based on opinion polls although recent readings the referendum result is too close to call.

Sales at foreign exchanges in Britain are up on last year, and Thomas Exchange Global senior manager Trevor Samuel said he believed people were 'panic buying'.



Queues formed outside foreign exchange shops today as Britons rushed to buy currency ahead of the EU referendum vote. Pictures is a bureau in London

Most forecasters expect the pound to fall sharply if there is a vote to leave the EU on Thursday, which would weaken the spending power of British holidaymakers abroad

Caretaker John Murphy, 67, queuing by a shop near Liverpool station in London, said: 'We're going away in September so I'm buying euros for that because I think the pound's going to go down.'

IT manager Richard Bailey, 44, also said he expected the pound to fall if Britain votes 'out'. 





The Post Office said overall currency sales in its branches and online were up 74 percent - compared to last year - since the weekend, with Tuesday sales 49 per cent higher in branch.

Online, sales were up 381 per cent on the same day a year ago.

Travelex said its online currency orders had increased by 30 per cent from June 14 to June 21.

Marks and Spencer Bank, which offers foreign exchange services in M&S department stores and online, said its foreign currency sales were about normal for the time of year.

Demand was split fairly evenly between euros and dollars, the Post Office and Travelex said.

David Swann from Travelex said: 'While we can't say for sure, it's highly possible that this surge is due to the uncertainty being fuelled (by) tomorrow's vote.'

Sue Macmillan, who is voting Remain, took this picture at Hammersmith Station in London yesterday

Kevin Smith posted this picture of a queue outside a foreign exchange shop in Canary Wharf, London

A man looks at a board showing currency exchange rates outside a Bureau de Change in North London

Shifts in the pound's value in the run-up to the vote have caused problems for British companies that trade abroad, especially money transfer companies such as Azimo and Transferwise.

They have halved the 5-6 percent in spread that banks charge for purchases of euros or other major currencies, leaving them exposed should sterling weaken by 10 percent or more, as many bankers have predicted it will on a vote to leave the EU.

Azimo said it will suspend operations on Thursday due to market volatility and because uncertainty around the vote would make it impossible to guarantee the safety of customers' money.

Sterling rose on Wednesday, hovering below a 5-1/2-month high against the dollar, as investors made fewer bets against the pound just a day before the referendum.

One pound currently buys $1.471 and 1.299 euros on the open market.  (Additional reporting by Patrick Graham and Lawrence White; Editing by Stephen Addison and Catherine Evans)

