'Brexit is proof that Trump will be the next president': 'Anti-immigration' message and shift to the Right that led to UK's seismic break with Europe draws parallels with rise of The Donald

2016-6-24

As Donald Trump flew in to Scotland today after the UK's seismic break with the European Union, parallels have been drawn with the anti-immigration message that led to Brexit and his rise to presumptive Republican presidential candidate. 

Many have pointed out the similarities between Britain's decision to leave the EU and Trump's campaign - and believe it is an indication of how Americans will vote on November 8, which could see Trump in the White House.

The Donald's arrival in the UK will be seen by many as a meeting of minds - two worlds colliding with shared views including a disgruntled electorate; lost national pride; isolationism; and the issue of immigration.

However, he may not get the desired reception in Scotland: while voters in England and Wales swung the result for Leave, Scots voted overwhelmingly for remaining part of the EU. 

And today, he promised close ties between the U.S. and UK if he becomes President, saying: 'A Trump Administration pledges to strengthen our ties with a free and independent Britain, deepening our bonds in commerce, culture and mutual defense'. 

'Brexit is further proof that Donald J Trump will be the next President of the United States,' wrote Broderick Greer on Twitter. 

Scroll down for video 











Twitter drew parallels with the 'anti-immigration' message that led to Brexit with the meteoric rise of the Donald Trump

The people of the United Kingdom have exercised the sacred right of all free peoples. 

They have declared their independence from the European Union, and have voted to reassert control over their own politics, borders and economy. 

A Trump Administration pledges to strengthen our ties with a free and independent Britain, deepening our bonds in commerce, culture and mutual defense. 

The whole world is more peaceful and stable when our two countries – and our two peoples – are united together, as they will be under a Trump Administration.

Come November, the American people will have the chance to re-declare their independence. 

Americans will have a chance to vote for trade, immigration and foreign policies that put our citizens first. 

They will have the chance to reject today’s rule by the global elite, and to embrace real change that delivers a government of, by and for the people.

I hope America is watching, it will soon be time to believe in America again.

Paul Harris added that Americans should learn a lesson from the result in Britain.

'If you think Trump can't win you are lazy, complacent and very dangerous,' he warned.

Arnivan Ghosh said Trump should look for tips from Nigel Farage, the leader of the UK Independence Party who has spent 20 years campaigning to the country to leave the EU, on how to win with a 'divisive, anti-immigration' message. 

'That Nigel dude is British Trump,' added Wanda Sykes.

Huw James Collins added: 'The correlation of Trump enthusiasts delighting in the 'Leave' victory perfectly illuminates the roots of this debacle.'

Others were concerned that the result will lend credence to Trump's nationalistic agenda and mean other nations turn to isolationist policies.

'Deeply concerned that #Brexit will cue other nations to recede into isolationism, and lend credence to #Trump's nativist agenda,' wrote Guy Wilson.

Many have warned that this nationalist drive now sets the world stage for a Donald Trump presidency.

In an op-ed for the LA Times, London School of Economics fellow Brian Klaas and Marcel Dirsus, a lecturer at the University of Kiel in Germany, compare Brexit voters to 'Trump supporters sporting "Make America Great Again" hats' who 'believe they have lost too much for too long'. 



'Their complaint is understandable,' they write. 'But turning inward will only make their problems worse and the world more dangerous. 

'Britain narrowly succumbed to isolationist populism Thursday. Let’s hope Americans don’t make the same mistake by voting for a Trump presidency come November.' 

Meanwhile, BBC World News anchor Katty Kay, an English journalist now based in Washington, said that if ‘disgruntlement, nationalism, populism and anti-globalization’ are enough to force a radical move in the UK, then it could be the same in the United States. 

She highlighted five reasons why Brexit could mean the billionaire businessman winning the White House in November: an angry electorate, globalization, immigration, lost pride and populism.



Twitter has been flooded with those comparing the Brexit campaign's 'divisive' anti-immigration message with the meteoric rise of The Donald







Many on Twitter believing the result it's a sign that Trump will be the next president of the United States

‘The two most surprising political phenomena of this year have been the rise of Donald Trump and the success of the Leave Europe camp in Britain’s referendum on Brexit,’ she wrote in an article published earlier this week. 

Kay notes that few pundits saw either coming, including herself, but believes the result in Britain could indicate how America votes in the November 8 election.

She compared Donald Trump’s tactic of tapping into the angry electorate with Boris Johnson, the former Mayor of London who campaigned for Britain to leave the EU. 



‘Mr Johnson promises Brits a better deal if they throw off the onerous yoke of EU regulations. Mr Trump promises Americans a better deal if they put him in the White House.’ 



