PM uses Twitter to highlight Jo Cox's final defence of the EU as former Tory minister claims Remain side are trying to 'spin' her killing to win referendum

2016-6-19

Labour MP Jo Cox, who was killed last week. The elected member evoked strong pro-EU views

David Cameron yesterday evoked the pro-EU views of murdered MP Jo Cox amid a continuing row over whether the tragedy was being politicised.

On Twitter, the Prime Minister highlighted the final article written by the Labour MP, in which she warned voters not to ‘fall for the spin’ that quitting the EU would solve concerns over immigration.

Mr Cameron praised her ‘strong voice’ in the referendum campaign and said it would be ‘badly missed’ in the closing days.

Stronger In campaigners said that by linking to her article, the Prime Minister was simply ensuring her voice would be heard.

But the intervention came amid clashes over whether Mrs Cox’s death was being politicised.

At lunchtime, pro-Brexit Labour MP Kate Hoey told a rally: ‘Jo was a democrat and she would want this referendum campaign to continue, and she would want no one to link anything around this referendum with that terrible tragedy.’

Mrs Cox’s final article was re-published yesterday in several newspapers and by the Stronger In campaign. 

Alongside a link to it, the Prime Minister tweeted: ‘Jo Cox’s strong voice in the campaign to remain in the EU will be badly missed.’ 

In the piece, Mrs Cox wrote: ‘There is now an unprecedented consensus that leaving the EU would hurt our economy and hit our pockets.

‘We cannot allow voters to fall for the spin that a vote to leave is the only way to deal with concerns about immigration.

‘We can do far more to address both the level and impact of immigration while remaining in the EU. I very rarely agree with the Prime Minister but on this he’s right: we are stronger, safer and better off in.’

However, the row came after a former defence minister lashed out at pro-EU figures for trying to 'spin' the tragic killing of Jo Cox in a bid to win the referendum.

On Twitter, the Prime Minister highlighted the final article written by the Labour MP, in which she warned voters not to ‘fall for the spin’ on quitting the EU 

Tory MP Andrew Murrison tweeted the comment as polls showed the race was neck and neck again after a surge for Remain.

However, soon afterwards he deleted the post and replaced it with one that urged both sides to put their cases 'squarely, honestly and decently'.

Mr Cameron praised Mrs Cox's ‘strong voice’ in the referendum campaign and said it would be ‘badly missed’ in the closing days

Campaigning resumed yesterday after being put on hold in the aftermath of the fatal attack on Mrs Cox, a strong supporter of Britain staying in the EU.

The man charged with her murder, Thomas Mair, gave his name as 'death to traitors, freedom for Britain' when he appeared in court on Saturday.

A Survation poll for The Mail On Sunday found Remain had opened up a three-point lead on 45 per cent to 42 per cent - reversing the firm's findings from Thursday.

Another showed the two sides are level while a third has voters saying they are more enthusiastic about leaving the EU than staying.

Pollsters have suggested that the apparent surge for Remain could be down to undecided voters plumping for the status quo as the crucial ballot looms.

But Mr Murrison complained that pro-EU figures may be exploiting the tragedy to bolster support for ties with Brussels.

'Remain side spinning Jo Cox murder for partisan advantage in #EUReferendum shameful,' he wrote on Twitter.

Within hours the MP had deleted the post and replaced it with one that said: 'Can both sides in this horrible #EUReferendum campaign & the press use the last few days to put case squarely, honestly and decently?'

Pro-EU figures have stressed the need for unity and condemned the tone of the campaign in the wake of the killing.

In a letter to the Observer today, Tony Blair, ex-deputy PM Nick Clegg and Conservative grandee Lord Heseltine say the vote is about 'what sort of country we are'.

The message - which was highlighted on Twitter by David Cameron - said: 'There is something more fundamental at stake: the sort of country we are. A democracy where disagreements do not degenerate into incivility and where debate is not used to divide our communities.

'We have a chance as a country to reject division, isolationism and blame. To choose co-operation. For the future of our children, that is a chance we must take.'



Tory MP Andrew Murrison tweeted that Remain supporters were 'spinning' Jo Cox's killing, before deleting the post and urging both sides to put their cases 'squarely, honestly and decently'

Brexit campaigners Michael Gove and Chris Grayling today joined condemnation of a poster unveiled by Ukip leader Nigel Farage, depicting a queue of migrants on the Slovenian border and the message 'Breaking point'.

Mr Gove said the image had made him shudder, but insisted it was right to raise other concerns about our inability to control our own borders.

At a rally in London yesterday, Boris Johnson insisted voting to cut ties with Brussels would 'neutralise' extremists who scaremonger about immigration.

'I'm not only pro-immigration, I'm pro-immigrants,' the former London mayor said.

'And I am in favour of an amnesty of illegal immigrants who have been here for more than 12 years, unable to contribute to this economy, unable to pay taxes, unable to take proper part in society.

Boris Johnson told a rally in London that Brexit was the best way to 'neutralise' extremists spreading fear about immigration 

'I'll tell you why. Because it is the humane thing to do. It is the economically rational thing to do.

'And it means taking back control of a system that is at the moment completely out of control.

'If we take back control of our immigration system with an Australian-style points based system, we'll be dealing fairly and justly with every part of the world and we will be neutralising people in this country and across Europe who wish to play politics with immigration and who are opposed to immigrants.

'That is the way forward. To neutralise the extremists.'



Rival MPs could mix for tributes to Jo Cox in House of Commons 

Rival MPs could break with tradition and sit together in the House of Commons when they pay tribute to MP Jo Cox.

Leader of the House Chris Grayling said MPs should 'do what they feel comfortable doing', while Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn also signalled he was open to the idea.

Parliament is being recalled todayto allow MPs to remember Mrs Cox, who was killed in her constituency of Batley and Spen in West Yorkshire on Thursday.

Neighbouring Labour MP Jason McCartney, who represents Colne Valley, has written to Speaker John Bercow requesting that backbenchers be permitted to sit together across the House in a mark of solidarity.

Asked about the rules of the house, Mr Grayling said: 'I don't think there are any formal rules but I think for tomorrow's event it is a celebration and a commemoration and an expression of profound sadness and to my mind it is an occasion where people should do what they feel comfortable doing.'

Meanwhile, leader of the Liberal Democrats Tim Farron said it is a 'great idea' and would show that MPs are 'united against hate'. 

Mr Corbyn told the BBC's Andrew Marr Show: 'I received that suggestion last night actually and we're thinking about that and have a talk tomorrow, but tomorrow is going to be a dignified occasion, it's not going to be a time for lots of long speeches.'

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn said he was considering whether to allow his MPs to mix in with those of other parties during Commons tributes to Jo Cox today

 



