Australia's Brexit mayhem: Warning of 'market contagion' after Britain's shock vote to leave the EU causes stocks and currency to tumble

2016-6-24

Australia has been warned of market contagion after Britain's vote to leave Europe in the EU referendum, with moves in currency markets on Friday being 'remarkably volatile'.

The Sydney Morning Herald reports that Commonwealth Bank of Australia chief currency strategist Richard Grace had a warning for the country in the short-term.

'We've seen the pound sterling from a high of around $US1.50 down to $1.40, almost a 10 cent move. It's been remarkably volatile,' Mr Grace said. 'It's now sitting around $US1.45.'

Australia may face market contagion after Britain's shock vote to leave EU on Friday

'The currency markets are moving back and forth in regards to how the results are trickling in.

'The volatility was high in the lead up, as high as during the global financial crisis. All the expectations were that volatility would further spike this morning.'

Over the course of Friday the Australian dollar was caught up in the pound/US dollar trade, and fell by around a cent through the morning.

Britain's exit from Europe could also now unleash market swings in Europe with the risk of contagion spreading to other markets including Australia, the Financial Review reports. 

Currency markets were classed as 'remarkably volatile' on Friday in aftermath

One statistic showed that the pound was now down an incredible 15 per cent against the yen. 



Reserve Bank of Australia financial markets chief Guy Debelle said the surprise 'leave' vote meant that liquidity would be the key question for price movements, such as in foreign exchange markets.

'Prices will move. Whether they move… dramatically and whether liquidity dries up that's what remains to be seen,' he said. 

'Really the question is how much liquidity there is going to be in the market, and that's not clear.'

Volatility was high as during the global financial crisis in currency markets

Over the course of Friday the Australian dollar was caught up in the pound/US dollar trade, and fell by around a cent

The economic impact of a Brexit result on Australia was not clear, he said, but market volatility was a given. 



'Volatility is generally a global phenomenon these days not a local phenomenon,' Debelle said. 

'But the macro impact is not so clear to me that it is necessarily dramatic. So it's really financial factors and then the question is how long lived they are.'

'The question is how much liquidity there is going to be in the market, and that's not clear,' Reserve Bank of Australia financial markets chief Guy Debelle said

 



  





