Ex-BNP member who said 'LGBT brought the Orlando shootings on themselves' will fight Labour in the Jo Cox by-election to 'stop the left milking her death' 

2016-6-19

A former BNP member who claims the Left are trying to 'milk' the death of Jo Cox and blamed gay people for the Orlando shootings will contest her seat in the by-election.

The MP was stabbed three times and shot at point blank range outside her constituency on Thursday and the man accused gave his name as 'death to traitors, freedom for Britain' in court.

Her bereaved husband Brendon Cox has since vowed to fight right-wing extremism in her name, but today, an extremist politician vowed to contest her seat in the by-election triggered by her murder.

Hours after she was shot, Buckby, who idolised BNP leader Nick Griffin, shamelessly tweeted: 'Media and left will milk this for all it's worth.'

Jack Buckby has declared that he will contest the Batley and Spen by-election sparked by the killing of Labour MP Jo Cox. The Tories, Lib Dems and Ukip have said they will not field a candidate

Hours after she Jo Cox was shot, Buckby, who idolised BNP leader Nick Griffin, shamelessly tweeted: 'Media and left will milk this for all it's worth'

His Twitter feed is packed with extremist views and after 50 people were shot in a gay club in Orlando, Buckby recorded a video and said the LGBT community have 'blood on their hands'

His Twitter feed is packed with extremist views and after 50 people were shot in a gay club in Orlando, Buckby recorded a video claiming that the LGBT community have 'blood on their hands'.

He added: 'The left and LGBT cry their crocodile tears, but THEY are responsible for the murder of over 50 people in a gay club in Orlando. It's time the left realised that they brought this on themselves.' 

Buckby also shows total reverence for Donald Trump, the US presidential candidate, and poses proudly with a cap saying 'Make America Great Again', one of the Republican's campaign slogans.

He also slams London Mayor Sadiq Khan, posting a picture with the caption 'London surrenders to Islam' after the Labour candidates victory.





The controversial young politician said today he would ignore a cross-party truce and stand as there was 'too much at stake'.

Mrs Cox was shot three times and stabbed in a brutal attack on Thursday as she arrived for a constituency surgery in Birstall, near Leeds.

In the days after Mrs Cox's death the Conservatives, Liberal Democrats and Ukip all announced their intention not to stand in the by-election.

He also slams London Mayor Sadiq Khan, posting a picture with the caption 'London surrenders to Islam' after the Labour candidates victory

Buckby also tweets about what he calls the 'Ramadan Mombathon' talking of terror in the name of Islam

However Jack Buckby, now a member of the Liberty GB group, said Labour had 'blood on its hands', and there was 'too much at stake' to allow them to retake Batley and Spen unchallenged.

Mr Buckby's announcement was criticised as 'inflammatory' by the Green party group leader on Kirklees council.

Councillor Andrew Cooper said: 'If we have learnt anything in the last few weeks and certainly in the last few days, it is that people need to be more respectful to people who have different and contrasting views.'

Mr Buckby, 23, who is a former BNP member and stood for election for Liberty GB in the 2014 European elections, said: 'We cannot let Jo Cox's tragic death be in vain.

'We must use this election as an opportunity to create dialogue and give a voice to the millions of working and middle class Britons who are seeing their communities trashed by an arrogant and out-of-touch political class.'

Labour MP Jo Cox, who was killed last week

The announcement came after Mrs Cox's sister called for people to show 'strength and solidarity' in the wake of her death.

Mair, from Birstall, is charged with murder, grievous bodily harm, possession of a firearm with intent to commit an indictable offence and possession of a knife.

Campaigning resumed in the EU referendum today after being largely put on hold since Thursday as a mark of respect for Mrs Cox. 

Brexit supporters have been distancing themselves from a poster unveiled by Ukip leader Nigel Farage last week that featured the headline 'Breaking Point' over an image of refugees walking into Europe through Slovenia.

Michael Gove said he 'shuddered' when he saw the anti-immigration pitch, saying it was the 'wrong thing to do'. House of Commons leader Chris Grayling also slammed the image.

Chancellor George Osborne, who supports the Remain campaign, also condemned the poster as having 'echoes' of far right literature from the 1930s.

Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon, Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond and Brexit-backing Labour MP John Mann all slammed the poster in interviews today. 



Meanwhile, former defence minister has lashed out at pro-EU figures for trying to 'spin' the tragic killing of Jo Cox in a bid to win the referendum. 

Tory MP Andrew Murrison tweeted the comment today as polls showed the race was neck and neck again after a surge for Remain.

However, soon afterwards he deleted the post and replaced it with one that urged both sides to put their cases 'squarely, honestly and decently'.

David Cameron today highlighted about a strongly pro-EU article Mrs Cox wrote days before her death, stating.

Alongside a link to the piece, the Prime Minister tweeted: 'Jo Cox's strong voice in the campaign to remain in the EU will be badly missed.'

Pro-EU figures have also stressed the need for unity and condemned the tone of the campaign in the wake of the killing.



Tory MP Andrew Murrison tweeted that Remain supporters were 'spinning' Jo Cox's killing, before deleting the post and urging both sides to put their cases 'squarely, honestly and decently'

In a letter to the Observer today, Tony Blair, ex-deputy PM Nick Clegg and Conservative grandee Lord Heseltine say the vote is about 'what sort of country we are'.



The message - which was highlighted on Twitter by Mr Cameron - said: 'There is something more fundamental at stake: the sort of country we are. A democracy where disagreements do not degenerate into incivility and where debate is not used to divide our communities.

'We have a chance as a country to reject division, isolationism and blame. To choose co-operation. For the future of our children, that is a chance we must take.' 

At a rally in London today, Boris Johnson insisted voting to cut ties with Brussels would 'neutralise' extremists who scaremonger about immigration.

'I'm not only pro-immigration, I'm pro-immigrants,' the former London mayor said.

'And I am in favour of an amnesty of illegal immigrants who have been here for more than 12 years, unable to contribute to this economy, unable to pay taxes, unable to take proper part in society.

'I'll tell you why. Because it is the humane thing to do. It is the economically rational thing to do.

'And it means taking back control of a system that is at the moment completely out of control.

'If we take back control of our immigration system with an Australian-style points based system, we'll be dealing fairly and justly with every part of the world and we will be neutralising people in this country and across Europe who wish to play politics with immigration and who are opposed to immigrants.

'That is the way forward. To neutralise the extremists.' 

Boris Johnson told a rally in London today that Brexit was the best way to 'neutralise' extremists spreading fear about immigration 

 

