Now Tory party members will choose Britain's new Prime Minister - and you can be part of the election by paying a £25 membership

2016-6-24

Britain's next Prime Minister after the resignation of David Cameron will be chosen by a group of around 100,000 Conservative members, as well as the party's Members of Parliament.

The new leader of the Tories will be invited to form a Government by the Queen as soon as he or she is elected by the party.

The precise timetable of events is unclear - but Mr Cameron said today that he expects his successor to be in place by time of the Conservative conference in October.

That implies that the leadership contest will have to begin within a few weeks at the latest, given that all previous such elections have taken several months.

Quit: David Cameron's successor will be chosen by Conservative MPs and party members

Adding to the political drama, the new Tory leader may choose to hold a General Election in order to secure a fresh mandate - and Labour could be facing a leadership crisis too after MPs called for a vote of confidence in Jeremy Corbyn.

The formal process of leaving the European Union, which involves triggering a treaty clause called Article 50, will not begin until Britain has a new Prime Minister.

The ongoing uncertainty surrounding the UK's political leadership could cause further economic chaos, as markets and businesses wait to find out what the country's relationship with the EU will look like in future.

And European leaders have called on Britain to speed up negotiations in order to reduce the turmoil caused by a protracted exit process.

Delivering his resignation speech in Downing Street today, Mr Cameron said: 'I will do everything I can as Prime Minister to steady the ship over the coming weeks and months, but I do not think it would be right for me to try to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination.

Emotional: The Prime Minister announced his departure flanked by his wife Samantha in Downing Street

Contenders: Boris Johnson and Theresa May are considered the frontrunners in the leadership contest

'There is no need for a precise timetable today, but in my view we should aim to have a new Prime Minister in place by the start of the Conservative party conference in October.

'Delivering stability will be important and I will continue in post as Prime Minister with my Cabinet for the next three months.'

The leadership election will be overseen by the 1922 Committee, a grouping of Tory backbenchers, and will be formally triggered when Mr Cameron submits a letter of resignation to the chairman Graham Brady.

It consists of two stages - an initial vote by all Conservative MPs to whittle the total number of candidates down to two, and a head-to-head battle to attract the support of party members around the country.

Only two leadership elections have previously taken place under the current rules - the 2001 contest won by Iain Duncan Smith and Mr Cameron's own victory in 2005.

In 2001, the first stage took just one month, while the second took three.

Four years later, Michael Howard deliberately delayed the first stage by five months to encourage a detailed debate, but the final stage was completed in around six weeks.

That implies that the forthcoming leadership election must begin in mid-July at the latest if the victor is to be in place in time for conference.

Threatened: Jeremy Corbyn could also face a leadership challenge from disgruntled Labour MPs

In the first stage of voting - which only takes place if there are three or more contenders - MPs vote in a series of rounds spaced several days apart, eliminating the bottom-placed candidate each round until only two remain.

Those two candidates then make it to a ballot paper which is sent to all paid-up members of the party for a nationwide postal vote. Membership of the party costs £25, or £5 for under-23s.

It is the first time in British history that ordinary party members will have the chance to elect a Prime Minister directly, by voting for the new leader of a governing party.

The Conservative party does not have a scheme similar to Labour's, which allows supporters to sign up to vote in the leadership election in return for a £3 donation.

Party bosses are unlikely to introduce such a programme - the shock election of Jeremy Corbyn last year, against the wishes of Labour MPs,  was partly ascribed to the influx of £3 voters.

After the new Prime Minister is in office, it will be his or her responsibility to trigger Article 50 and begin negotiations on how Britain will extricate itself from the EU.

It is considered possible that the new leader will attempt to call a General Election in order to obtain a personal mandate to govern.

Gordon Brown considered such a move when he took over from Tony Blair in 2007 - and his failure to do so is widely seen to have sapped his legitimacy in the eyes of the public.

Labour's Shadow Chancellor John McDonnell today said that he expects a new Election will be held before the end of this year.

If there is a fresh poll, it could face a new Labour leader - two senior backbenchers today submitted a formal motion of no confidence in Mr Corbyn's leadership.

Some Labour insiders blame their leader, a former Eurosceptic, for the referendum result because he failed to convince the party's supporters to follow its official line and vote Remain.

