Tory civil war threat over Brexit vote as tempers flare inside the hallowed Commons' Tea Room

2016-6-19

A Pro-EU ally of David Cameron vowed to take revenge if the UK votes to cut all ties with Brussels in an extraordinary row with a Brexit-backing colleague.

Conservative Health Minister Alistair Burt shouted at Right-wing Home Office Minister Mike Penning: ‘The Maastricht rebellion will look like a tea party if we come out of Europe.’

A friend of pro-Brexit Mr Penning is said to have shot back at Mr Burt: ‘Don’t make threats.’

Alistair Burt, right, threatened right wing Tory MP Mike Penning, left, inside the Commons' Tea Room with a massive split in the Conservative Party if the Brexiteers are successful on Thursday 

Eye witnesses said the confrontation took place in the hallowed Commons’ Tea Room early last week as Tory tensions over the impending EU vote referendum reached boiling point.

Ardent Europhile Mr Burt’s reference to Maastricht relates to the Tory revolt in the 1990s over the EU Maastricht Treaty signed by former Prime Minister John Major.

It plunged the party into a series of bitter rows and deep divisions widely thought to have contributed to the Tories’ disastrous General Election result in 1997 when Sir John was thrown out of power.

Ex-Grenadier Guard Mr Penning is a former aide to ex-Tory leader and leading Vote Leave campaigner Iain Duncan Smith who played a leading role in the Maastricht rows.

The row will dismay Tory colleagues who have so far clung to the idea that however bad the party’s current internal splits are, they have not degenerated to the savage exchanges of the 1990s.

That is despite the fact that the Tea Room bust-up is only the latest of a series of so-called ‘blue on blue’ attacks during the referendum campaign, including pro-Remain Energy Minister Amber Rudd’s acid-tongued jibe that Boris Johnson was ‘the life and soul of the party but he’s not the man you want driving you home at the end of the evening’.

Last night, friends of Mr Burt denied that he was personally threatening to stay up at nights, tabling amendments to wreck pro-Brexit legislation.

One said: ‘I think he was referring more to the general mayhem that would follow a referendum vote to quit the EU and we all know the chaos that could lead to.’

North East Bedfordshire MP Mr Burt himself declined to comment on the row. He said: ‘The Tea Room has always been a place of strong private opinions on which MPs should never comment – particularly this week when it all seems so petty in the light of other events.’

Mr Penning, MP for Hemel Hempstead, also declined to comment.

 

