'Damn! A bad day for Europe': Shockwaves spread across the continent as politicians and newspapers react to Brexit, while France's Marine Le Pen declares a 'victory for liberty'

2016-6-24

Newspapers and politicians across Europe have expressed their shock at Britain's decision to leave the EU, just a day after many pleaded with the UK to stay.

Voters in the UK clearly backed Brexit despite polls previously predicting that the country would remain within the bloc.

As leaders across Europe woke up to the news, France's far-right leader Marine Le Pen changed her Twitter picture to a Union Jack and told her followers the result was 'victory for freedom'.

'As I have been asking for years, we must now have the same referendum in France and EU countries,' she wrote.

Other European politicians called it a 'bad nightmare', while the European media also reacted with shock.

The Boston Herald reports the news of a Brexit on its front page with a picture of Brits outside the Houses of Parliament

Germany: Tabloid newspaper Bild expressed their shock at the result with a picture of dejected Remain campaigners with the headline 'Britain OUT' 

Austrian newspaper Kurier's take on the historic referendum, with a picture of John Cleese's Basil Fawlty

France: Liberation featured the picture of a married couple on top of a wedding cake holding Union flags saying 'Britain opts to leave' 

Denmark: Politiken also opted for a picture of two dejected Remain supporters holding their heads in shock 

As leaders across Europe woke up to the news, France's far-right leader Marine Le Pen changed her Twitter picture to a Union Jack and told her followers the result was 'victory for freedom'

German tabloid Bild, who yesterday offered 11 hilarious reasons for Britain to remain, posted on their website a picture of dejected Remain supporters with the headline: 'Britain Out.'

'The British referendum must lead to a reform of the European Union!' 

It went on to list eight things it must do to become 'adorable' again, including cutting back on bureaucracy, EU Commission costs and putting an end to the 'circus' of having the EU parliament sit in Strasbourg as well as Brussels.

Belgian newspaper Le Soir featured a picture of a married couple on top of a wedding cake holding Union flags, declaring 'Britain opts to leave.'

Danish newspaper Politiken also featured a picture of shocked Remain supporters.

Meanwhile the website of Italian newspaper Corriere della Serra and Spanish website El Pais featured a jubilant picture of leading Leave campaigner Nigel Farage. 

The New York Times' take on the referendum, with the headline 'British stun the world with vote to leave EU'

Belgium: The website of national newspaper Le Soir also chose to illustrate their shock at the result chosing a picture of a Remain supporters looking worried 

Italy: Corriere della Serra were running a Brexit special and summed up their coverage with a picture of a jubilant Nigel Farage 

Germany's influential Spiegel magazine, which two weeks ago took the extraordinary decision to devote an issue in English begging Britain to stay, said it was the 'big bang' and added: 'The unimaginable has happened. The Brexit. The British want to leave the EU - against the advice of almost all experts and against economic reason - and against the wishes of other Europeans.

'The result of the referendum is a shock. For Prime Minister David Cameron, for the majority of the political elite, for the economy - and for Europe. For the first time ever, a member country wants to leave the EU. It is a huge vote of no confidence and one that could find imitators. The future of the European Union is at stake.'

It went on to state that Britain stood at the gates of a political and economic crisis as a result.

'Black Friday' on the markets is now feared, it said, adding: 'Experts fear the country is now headed for a recession. 

'The whole political class in Westminster finds itself standing before enormously difficult times. After this defeat, Cameron will no longer be prime minister.' 

Spain: Newspaper website El Pais showed the two sides of the vote featuring a celebrating Farage and a Remain supporter commiserating with themselves

In France, the Gallic media spoke of a 'deeply divided' Britain, which would now enter one of the darkest periods in its recent history. 

Under the headline 'The Immediate consequences for Britons', L'Express said the millions who visit France from the UK every year would now need a visa.

Holidays on the continent will also be 'more expensive', and expats including retired people living in France will see agreements on their health treatment and other benefits scrapped.

Thousands of French people living and working in the UK will be reassessing their futures, along with Britons based in France.

L'Express also warned of more 'frontiers going up' around Europe, including one between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland.

Newspapers like Le Monde, meanwhile, highlighted 'the collapse of Sterling' and 'panic in the markets'.

It described a 'deeply divided' Britain, with 'large differences between the old and the young'.

Le Monde adds: 'The focus on immigration, which has risen sharply, could accentuate the fractures in a country, also marked by a widening gap in wealth between the poor and the wealthy.'

France: The Gallic media spoke of a 'deeply divided' Britain, which would now enter one of the darkest periods in its recent history

Le Point also warned of a 'domino effect', saying the 'terrible blow to the European project and the prime minister, David Cameron' would have lasting negative effects.

It comes as European leaders also began to express their shock at the result with the German vice chancellor Sigmar Gabriel branding the move a 'bad day for Europe'.

Gabriel, who is also Germany's economy minister said on his official Twitter account: 'Damn! A bad day for Europe!'

His colleague, the German foreign minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier added he also regretted Britain's decision to leave calling it a 'sad day for Europe. 

He tweeted: 'The early morning news from #GreatBritain are truly sobering. It looks like a sad day for #Europe +the #UnitedKingdom," Steinmeier wrote on Twitter.

While EU Parliament President Martin Schulz said he would speak with German Chancellor Angela Merkel 'on how we can avoid a chain reaction' of other EU states following.

He said: 'The chain reaction that is being celebrated everywhere now by eurosceptics won't happen.'

Germany: The vice chancellor of Germany Sigmar Gabriel was quick to tweet his dismay and the result saying: 'Damn! bad day for Europe!'

France: However, prominent French far right politician Marion Le Pen declared that the British result was a victory

The EU was the biggest single market in the world and 'Great Britain has just cut its ties with that market,' Schulz said.

'That'll have consequences and I don't believe other countries will be encouraged to follow that dangerous path."

'I am not shocked," he said of the results of the British referendum, adding: "We were prepared.' 

Former Finnish prime minister Alexander Stubb predicted the result would mean chaos on the continent.

He wrote on Twitter: 'Please tell me I'm still sleeping and this is all just a bad nightmare!

'Usually these things advance in three stages 1. Crisis; 2. Chaos; 3. Sub-optimal solution. Don't know where we are at this stage.'

Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte said he 'deeply regretted' the decision but 'European co-operation will have to continue'

European Council leader Donald Tusk has led the stunned continent's reaction to Brexit insisting: 'what doesn't kill you makes you stronger'

Meanwhile Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte said he 'deeply regretted' the decision but 'European co-operation will have to continue'.

He added that Brexit 'appeared irreversible but the process to leave may take a long time' and 'may not start until after the German elections' which are due between August and October 2017. 

However, the result also triggered Dutch far-right MP Geert Wilders to call for a referendum on EU membership in the Netherlands.

Wilders, who is leading opinion polls, said if he is elected prime minister next March he will force a vote.

He said in a statement: 'We want to be in charge of our own country, our own money, our own borders and our own immigration policy.

'As quickly as possible the Dutch need to get the opportunity to have their say about Dutch membership of the European Union.

'If I become prime minister, there will be a referendum in the Netherlands on leaving the European Union as well. Let the Dutch people decide.' 

USA: Other people on Twitter pondered if the EU referendum result suggested how the US presidential elections would go 

USA: After Leave campaigners won the referendum, on Twitter user joked Donald Trump might want to consult Nigel Farage 

European Council leader Donald Tusk led the stunned continent's reaction to Brexit insisting: 'what doesn't kill you makes you stronger'.

Tusk said Britain's 'historic' vote to leave the European Union should not provoke 'hysterical reactions' and urged the rest of the bloc to 'keep out unity as 27'. 

In America, the White House has yet to respond to the result but many took to Twitter to suggest it might predict a win for Donald Trump in the upcoming US preidential elections.

Broderick Greer tweeted: 'Brexit is further proof that Donald J Trump will be the next President of the United States.'

While Anivan Ghosh posted: 'Trump might want to consult Nigel Farage on how to win on a divisive, anti-immigration message. #Brexit'

Meanwhile Australian Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull predicted instability on the financial markets in the wake of Brexit.

He said: 'The impact on Australia immediately, directly, from a legal point of view, will be very limited because it will take some years for the United Kingdom to leave the European Union, to negotiate an exit.

'However, we've seen already large falls on stock markets and there will be a degree of uncertainty for some time.' 

