Plans to tackle rip-off energy bills 'are being watered down': Millions of families to continue facing punishing charges when crackdown is announced 

2016-6-21

Millions of families will continue to face punishing energy bills amid fears an official inquiry will water down plans to tackle rip-offs.

Details are due to be announced on Friday, the day of the EU referendum result, on what is being seen as a good day to bury the bad news.

The Competition & Markets Authority (CMA) launched an investigation into high energy bills two years ago.

Millions of families will continue to face punishing energy bills amid fears an official inquiry will water down plans to tackle rip-offs (file photo)

It found ordinary families who are on standard variable tariffs were effectively paying £1.2billion a year too much for heat and light.

Initially, the watchdog planned a temporary blanket cap on these tariffs, while other measures were put in place to boost competition and cut prices.

However, this has now been watered down and a cap will only cover the four million households which have a pre-payment meter.

The CMA is also proposing to set up a database of the more than 60 per cent of households that are on an expensive standard variable rate tariffs.

The idea is that this list will be used by the UK’s 37 energy companies to target customers with their own deals.

The move is highly controversial for there are fears it will trigger a blizzard of marketing junk mail from energy companies without a corresponding increase in switching and lower prices.

The CMA is also expected to put an end to controls on the number of tariffs each company can offer.

This represents a U-turn on a limit of four tariffs per company, which was introduced just two years ago at the behest of David Cameron in order to minimise confusion and complexity.

The CMA inquiry was set up following complaints from the industry regulator, Ofgem, and consumer groups that energy firms were failing to pass on falls in wholesale prices.

Energy firms have made some small price cuts on standard tariffs in the past two years, but these are tiny in the context of falls of 30 per cent in wholesale gas and electricity costs.

An investigation found ordinary families who are on standard variable tariffs were effectively paying £1.2billion a year too much for heat and light

As a result, the gap between the average standard tariff charged by the ‘big six’ suppliers and the cheapest deal has soared to £329 a year.

A recent report from consumer group Which? found the average cost of the standard deal with British Gas, SSE, Npower, EDF, E.on and Scottish Power is £1,063 a year.

This compared to £734 on the Flex1 Tariff with a small company called IRESA.

The energy firms have mounted a huge lobbying campaign to water down the CMA’s proposals, particularly the idea of a blanket cap on standard variable tariffs.

The idea of a blanket cap was also rejected by David Cameron and ministers, who issued new guidance to the CMA warning against the use of such a mechanism.

Which? supported the idea of a wide-ranging cap. It is concerned that the CMA’s proposals are too weak to deliver an end to the rip-offs promised by the Government.

Its director of policy and campaigns, Alex Neill, said: ’We remain concerned that the remedies proposed by the CMA will not lead to improved outcomes for consumers, so we are calling on the regulator to outline how it will evaluate the success of its proposals, including how they will deliver better outcomes for vulnerable customers who have never switched and are overpaying by hundreds of pounds.’

She added: ‘It is right that the energy market has been investigated but during this time the gap between standard tariffs and the cheapest deals has continued to soar.

‘If consumer trust is to be restored in this market then the CMA proposals must bring about real change in the energy market to benefit consumers who have been paying over the odds for gas and electricity.

‘The regulator must set out how it will measure the success of its reforms and ensure they will be effectively reviewed, so that action can be taken if competition and consumer outcomes don’t improve.’ 

