EU couldn't make it up! A gorilla getting punched, Geldof flicking the Vs from a boat and a Labour MP who apologised to a whole VILLAGE: The weirdest moments of a very strange referendum campaign

2016-6-23

The long and bitter struggle for public support in the EU referendum is finally at an end - and at times it has been downright weird. 

From immensely technical arguments about how many EU regulations there are covering bananas, to a dramatic intervention by the Swedish pop genius behind supergroup Abba, a serious debate has repeatedly strayed into wacky territory.

Many of these moments were provided by Boris Johnson. Once he got into his stride the former mayor brandished asparagus, drove diggers and dressed up like menacing villain Bane from Batman the Dark Knight rises.

An activist for the Vote Remain campaign dressed in a gorilla suit ahead of a visit by Boris Johnson in Winchester, as part of his tour on the Vote Leave campaign bus

Stronger In spokesman James McGrory expressed bewilderment at the alleged attack on the gorilla

At one point he talked someone out of throwing an egg at him.

The row over bananas ran for weeks after Mr Johnson suggested the EU banned them from being sold in bunches of more than three.

That prompted ridicule, with Remain activists delighting in posting photographs of themselves carrying larger bunches.

The Tory MP admitted he had the detail of the EU regulations wrong, saying they could in fact only be sold as singles or in bunches of more than.

Mr Johnson later returned to the row to claim there were in fact four different sets of regulations relating to the sale of bananas.

Remain activists mocked Mr Johnson by posting photographs of themselves on social media carrying large bunches of bananas

The Remain campaign then dispatched an activist in a gorilla suit to trail Mr Johnson on his battle-bus tour, lurking behind him in photoshoots with bunches of the fruit and placards ridiculing his claims.

It was all good-humoured fun - until the police received allegations that irritated Brexiteers had punched the gorilla in the face.

A Vote Leave source said at the time: 'We don't condone any violence at events. It was clear that Remain campaigners had attended the event to cause maximum disruption.'

The source insisted Boris was 'believed to be in a hotel at the time of any alleged incident'.

As Stronger In spokesman James McGrory tweeted: 'Who punches a teenager dressed as a gorilla in the face at a protest?' 

A chicken also featured repeatedly during the campaign, having been recruited in an attempt to embarrass David Cameron over his refusal to take part in head-to-head TV debates with anyone during the campaign. Perhaps reassuringly the animal was not able to get close enough to the Prime Minister to cause too much of a fuss.

On May 12, the former London Mayor donned protective gear and waved around what appeared to be a large angle grinder on a visit to Reid Steel in Christchurch, Dorset.

He was highlighting the £350 million a week the Leave campaign was claiming could be saved if the UK votes to quit the EU.

The previous day the Tory big beast had gobbled up ice cream and brandished asparagus and pasties as he rampaged around Cornwall.

There was an unexpected endorsement for Remain on May, when the pop genius behind legendary Swedish group Abba urged Britons not to take a chance on life outside the EU.

Abba star Bjorn Ulvaeus made an unexpected intervention in the EU referendum battle, saying it would make him 'emotional' if the UK decided that it did not want to stay in the union.

Bjorn Ulvaeus said it would make him 'emotional' if the UK decided that it did not want to stay in the union.

The plea, issued on the eve of the Eurovision song contest, delighted Remain campaigners who said it was a reminded that 'breaking up is hard to do'. 

In an interview with BBC Radio 5 Live ahead of the contest - which Abba won with Waterloo in 1974 - Bjorn said: “It would really make me sad if Britain would leave and what that would mean. It’s like someone you love leaving you. It’s emotional.” 

A pun-heavy statement from Remain said: 'The Leave campaign wants the British public to take a chance by turning our backs on the EU and risking our economic security and global influence.

Boris Johnson, right, seemed to be channelling Bane from Batman film The Dark Knight Rises as he campaigned in Dorset

'Breaking up is never easy, but despite that Vote Leave want us to walk away from the single market of 500 million people.

'That decision would damage our economy to the tune of £4,300 for each household, and threaten jobs, prices and export opportunities.

'When all is said and done, if we left the EU would not give us a better deal than they have for themselves.' 

Sir Bob Geldof was seen making obscene gestures at a flotilla of Brexit-backing fishermen led by Ukip leader Nigel Farage 

Mr Farage and Labour MP Kate Hoey appeared to be reenacting the 'King of the World' scene from hit film Titanic on their vessel at one stage

On May 19, Labour's Europe spokeswoman  made a grovelling apology after branding a voter a 'horrible racist' on the referendum campaign trail.

Pat Glass was visiting Sawley in Derbyshire when she delivered the jibe after having a conversation with the local man.

According to the report on BBC Radio Derby, the MP said: 'The very first person I come to is a horrible racist.

'I'm never coming back to wherever this is.' 

In a statement released later she apologised to the individual - who denied being racist - and admitted concerns about immigration were 'entirely valid'.

'The comments I made were inappropriate and I regret them,' Ms Glass said.

'Concerns about immigration are entirely valid and it's important that politicians engage with them.

Small Remain boats circled the Brexit trawlers during the odd stand-off

Sir Bob's behaviour during the flotilla stand-off did not seem to impress all his pro-EU allies

'I apologise to the people living in Sawley for any offence I have caused.'

Ukip leader Nigel Farage was among those condemning the remarks, saying they were 'cheap and disgraceful'.

'The Remain camp support mass migration, support EU open borders and are badly out of touch,' he added. 

The episode had echoes of Gordon Brown's humiliation during the 2010 general election campaign, when he was recorded by a stray microphone describing Gilliam Duffy as a 'bigoted woman'.

The 65-year-old had challenged the then-Prime Minister on issues including immigration as he visited Rochdale.

But having seemingly finished the conversation on good terms and got into his official car, Mr Brown was heard to dismiss Ms Duffy as a 'bigoted woman'.

Shadow Europe minister Pat Glass apologised to a whole village after calling a voter 'racist'

He later went to her house to apologise and sent an e-mail to Labour activists saying he 'profoundly' regretted the comments.

On June 8, Mr Cameron was mocked for adopting a bizarre 'power stance' which some have compared to the cowboy pose popularised by John Wayne.

Wags pointed out that the Prime Minister had been posing for photographs with his legs wide apart in apparent attempt to radiate an air of authority at referendum campaign events.

Rival flotillas headed by Mr Farage and Sir Bob Geldof clashed on June 19, with the rock star facing criticism for yelling insults and making obscene gestures.

In some of the most bizarre scenes of the referendum, the Ukip leader took to the waves with dozens of fishing boats as he urged a vote to cut ties with Brussels next week.

But they were greeted by boats carrying Remain supporters including the rock star, and loud speakers blasting out the song 'In With the In Crowd'.

The fleets chased each other along the river for several hours - while at one point hoses were deployed by the trawlers to try to settle the argument.

Sir Bob seemingly infuriated some pro-EU activists on his own vessel by flicking a V sign and making other rude signs at Mr Farage's crew.

One passenger took to Twitter to make clear her displeasure, saying she was 'disgusted' at the insults against their opponents.

Bethany Pickering wrote: 'Left Bob Geldof's boat in disgust. Fishermen, the Labour Remain presence sincerely apologises.'

Geldof berated Mr Farage over a PA system as his vessel, the Sarpedon, pulled alongside the boat carrying the Ukip leader. 

Boris Johnson brandished asparagus he bought from a market in Truro, Cornwall joking with market vendors that their industry would be 'just as sprouting' and 'delicious' outside the EU





