Nigel Farage calls for a new bank holiday to mark UK’s ‘Independence Day’ as his life’s work comes to fruition as the country votes for Brexit 

2016-6-24

Nigel Farage today called for a new bank holiday in Britain to mark its 'Independence Day' from Brussels.

The Ukip leader was celebrating 'a new dawn' for Britain after his 25-year campaign for the UK to leave the EU came to an extraordinary conclusion. 

But it came hours after he admitted that he believed Remain had won the referendum during a sombre interview an hour after the polls closed at 11pm last night.

It was a bitter blow for a man who admitted he had dedicated his life to cutting Britain's ties with Brussels.  

But by 12.30pm after a huge win for the Leave campaign Mr Farage was back in jubilant mood and grinning widely when the battle lurched back towards Brexit.









Ukip leader Nigel Farage today celebrated a momentous win, claiming victory and the completion of his life's work after Britain voted to leave the European union

It was a dramatic turnaround from the sombre scenes as Farage publicly admitted defeat last night when exit polls gave Remain a slim lead

However, as Leave took an early lead with a huge win in Sunderland, Farage looked elated as the prospect of his lifelong dream coming true looked possible

Moments after all the results were declared, he thanked the British people, tweeting: 'We've got our country back. Thanks to all of you. #IndependenceDay'





He looked jubilant after the vote, despite the fact that it could mean the end of his political career after 25 years of campaigning as he would lose his job as an MEP and does not have a Westminster seat.

However, he said today that the next step for Britain is a 'pro-Brexit' Prime Minister and after the vote, David Cameron announced he will stand aside in October.

After losing the campaign for Britain to remain in the EU, Cameron could now face a snap election which may leave the door open for Farage to finally win a seat in the Commons. 

After the result was confirmed this morning, he said: 'Today, the sun has risen on an independent Britain, and look at it, even the weather has improved.'

He said on BBC Radio 4's Today programme this morning that the next step is choosing the right leader, and suggested June 23 - 'independence day' - should be made a public holiday.  

Late last night, the Ukip leader looked crestfallen as he publicly admitted defeat when the exit polls gave Remain a slim lead.

However, by 12.30am, he looked jubilant as Sunderland returned with a big victory for Leave that experts had previously predicted would indicate they would go on to win the vote.

At 4.30am, he claimed an overall win, throwing his hands in the air as he declared June 23 Britain's 'independence day'. 



Talking of the victory today, he added: 'The election was won in my view in the Midlands and the North and it was the old Labour vote that came to us and we, particularly as a party, campaigned as hard as we could in those areas,' he told reporters on College Green in Westminster.

'There is still a massive disconnect between Westminster, SW1 and real communities,' he added.

Farage also said he hoped Brexit would kick start the break up of the EU.

Nigel Farage responds to a historic victory today, although it could mean the end of his career in politics

After the result was confirmed, Farage spoke on the steps of Westminster, saying: 'Today, the sun has risen on an independent Britain, and look at it, even the weather has improved.'

As he accepted congratulations from fellow campaigners, the Ukip leader smiled outside Westminster

He added: 'An opinion poll in the Netherlands said that a majority there now want to leave, so we may well be close perhaps to Nexit.

'Similarly in Denmark a majority there are in favour of leaving so we could be quite close to Dexit.

'And I'm told the same may apply to Sweden and perhaps Austria and perhaps even Italy too.

'The EU is failing, the EU is dying, I hope that we've got the first brick out of the wall.'

He added: 'We need the negotiations to start as soon as humanly possible, we need to start thinking globally about our future, and the other thing I think that needs to happen is that June 23 needs to become a national bank holiday and we will call it independence day.'























Nigel Farage was a founding member of Ukip after leaving the Conservative party in 1992 and campaigning against the euro and European Union. 

The scenes outside Westminster were awash with Union Jacks today after 

A vote leave supporter celebrates at a Brexit party in Westminster after early votes suggest a victory

He fought for seats in Westminster elections and the European union elections in 1994, billing himself as an alternative to mainstream politicians, but did not win a seat for Ukip.

Farage was eventually elected as a Member of the European Parliament in 1999 and gave controversial speeches against the euro, constantly criticising the work of Brussels.

He continued to fight for change and became leader of the Ukip party in 2006, however, he has been unable to win a seat in Westminster despite contesting numerous elections.

In the 2010 election, he fought for the seat of Buckingham and Westminster, briefly resigning from his post as leader of Ukip to focus on the election.

He was seriously injured in a plane crash when the aircraft, which was flying a Ukip banner, came down on the morning of the election on May 6.

Farage suffered a punctured lung and broken injuries and said he has lived with constant pain due to the injuries. 

Farage said today that the first thing that needs to happen in Britain is for a pro-Brexit Prime Minister to replace David Cameron, who campaigned for Britain to remain in the EU

This morning, Cameron announced he will be resigning in October, saying he is not the right person to 'captain the ship' as Britain departs from the European Union

He failed to win the seat, however, he claimed a win for the party when the Conservatives promised an EU referendum to stave off an increasing wave of Euroscepticism within the public and their own party.

Farage fought for another seat, Thanet South, in 2010, and had promised to resign if he did not win.

However, after handing in his resignation to the Ukip board, they refused it in a controversial move which saw him hold on to leadership of the party.

But despite failing to win a seat, Farage claimed a victory today in the historic ballot after stacking up votes in England and Wales against support for Remain in London and Scotland. 

The direction of the battle started to become clear with a shock result in Sunderland which saw the Out camp win by 61 per cent to 39 per cent.

A surprise victory for Brexit in Swansea, where the pro-EU side had been expecting to romp home, signposted a disastrous showing for Remain across Wales.

Nigel Farage shakes his supporters' hands after a dramatic speech claiming victory in which he credited ordinary volunteers from all and no political parties with the Leave win

A jubilant Nigel Farage celebrated with supporters after the Leave campaign headed for a victory with just a few areas left to declare

But now the battle is won, Conservative MPs such as Leave campaign leaders Boris Johnson and Michael Gove will be expected to usher in the change with Farage stuck in the political wilderness.

Even if Farage were to win a by-election, there are questions over his health after speculation when he was fighting the election last year.

He admitted he was prescribed Temazepam for a serious back condition and suffered serious headaches and shoulder pain.

The politician said he saw his doctor twice a week for treatment and he had also been prescribed with sleeping pills to help as he worked to a grueling schedule throughout the election campaign.

He has also been touched by scandal after being accused of having an affair with former aide Annabelle Fuller. 

But today, he enjoyed the victory, speaking on the steps of Westminster after celebrating with campaigners in London. 

The Ukip leader, who started campaigning for Brexit 25 years ago, raised his hands in delight after Leave won the vote last night

Moments after all the results were declared, he thanked the British people, tweeting: 'We've got our country back. Thanks to all of you. #IndependenceDay.' 



This morning, he told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme that Britain must 'have a Government that is committed to Brexit',

He added: 'Two things need to happen - one is a Brexit Prime Minister, and secondly we need a negotiating team who are going to go to Brussels to get us our new deal.

'But also, simultaneously, let's start negotiating not just with Brussels but with the rest of the world because the real opportunity we have got from Brexit is that we have left a failing political union in Europe, we can now start to re-engage with the world.'

He said he was prepared to wait a couple of months to get a pro-Brexit Prime Minister and that Britain should 'play within the rules of the club' and trigger Article 50 and begin the process of leaving the EU.

Calling for a national holiday, he added: 'There are 183 countries in the world who have independence day - what we have just done is we voted to become the 184th.

Leave campaigners cheer from London as they welcome winning results around the country tonight

UKIP's Paul Nuttall, Steven Woolfe and David Campbell at Manchester Town Hall celebrating the victory

'We have broken free from a failing political union. We have managed, the little people, the ordinary people who have ignored all the threats that have come from big business and big politics and it has been a huge, amazing exercise in democracy.'

Speaking at the national count centre in Manchester, Paul Nuttall, deputy leader of Ukip, said: 'This is just the beginning - we are going to make this country even better.'

When asked about the impact on Sterling, he replied: 'That's short term pain for long term gain.'

David Cameron will face crowds outside Downing Street today, where he is expected to announce that Britain will be leaving the EU.

Yesterday, 80 pro-Brexit Conservative MPs signed a letter backing him to stay on as Prime Minister even if Britain votes to Leave but he will now face pressure to resign after a failed campaign to Remain.

The SNP said the result could now trigger a new referendum in Scotland, which voted heavily in favour of remaining in the EU. 

