The EU is like an 'orgy': Made in Chelsea stars urge people to vote in EU referendum - even if polling stations are 'absolutely ghastly'... but do they know ANYTHING about the EU? 

2016-6-20

Made in Chelsea stars have urged people to vote in Thursday's referendum by filming a short skit that reveals how little they know about the EU themselves. 

Mark-Francis says people should take part because 'voting is so in, even if the polling stations are absolutely ghastly,' while Binky compared the EU to an 'orgy' because 'there are a lot of countries in the EU'.  

Jamie Laing decided the EU was more like spooning, while Brexit would be 'like spreading on a big bed by myself'. 

Scroll down for video 

Mark-Francis (pictured left) says people should take part because 'voting is so in, even if the polling stations are absolutely ghastly,' while Binky (right) compared the EU to an 'orgy' because 'there are a lot of countries in the EU'

When Toff - real name Georgia Toffolo - told him Britain would leave the single market if voters back Brexit in Thursday's referendum, Jamie took it personally. 

‘I’m not part of a single market, I’m in a relationship. It took me ages to find Frankie. I’m now in a relationship, you’re saying that’s all going to change?' he asked. 

But Binky, whose real name is Alexandra Felstead, liked the sound of going it alone. ‘See, I’m a safe kind of girl. I like being in a relationship.'

'Yeah it excites me,' added Toff. 

And then they moved on to other earth-shattering consequences of Brexit. 

'Hang on, if we leave does that mean we wouldn't be part of Eurovision? No, come on, shut up.' 

When Toff explains that Britain could be forced to leave the single market, Jamie takes it personally  

Mark-Francis has his finger on the pulse of current affairs as he explains what the term 'Brexit' means

And that revealed the most shocking ignorance of all from Mark-Francis, who asked: 'What’s Eurovision?' 

The debate was started by Jamie as the four sat down for lunch. 

'Guys, honestly we have to enjoy this because this may be the last time we can enjoy some Pinot noir and some poisson.' 



Asked why, he told Binky: 'Because we might be leaving Europe obviously, that's why.' 

Mark-Francis insisted Britain 'isn't going anywhere' and soon the four were on to comparing Brexit to an 'Armageddon of Frosties and KitKat, put together in a cereal box'.  







They weren't the only celebrities releasing an EU referendum-related video today. 

Jeremy Clarkson and James May have made a bizarre film urging voters to stay in the EU because leaving would make it much harder to film their motoring shows.

Standing in front of a map of Europe, they warn that European countries outside the EU, such as Switzerland, are a 'waste of time,' explaining to viewers that they don't film in the country because of custom duties.

The short YouTube video showed the pair, who are filming for their new Amazon show The Grand Tour, attempting to put on a united front despite being known for their argumentative relationship.  

Jeremy Clarkson and James May (pictured at the studio for their new Amazon motoring show Grand Tour on Thursday) have made a bizarre film urging voters to stay in the EU because leaving would make it much harder to film their motoring shows

They warned that European countries outside the EU, such as Switzerland, were a 'waste of time,' revealing to viewers that they don't film in the country because of custom duties

Clarkson and May said they were 'fond' of Europe and staying in the EU was one of few issues they agree on - along with the views that the Ford Mondeo is a good car and 'sandwich spread is delicious'.   



'It's annoys me actually, I'll be honest, because I want to remain in Europe but that means agreeing with him,' Clarkson explains, motioning to his colleague. 

May says: 'This is very uncharacteristic - we have to put aside the normal policy of our TV show and our relationship and agree on something apart from that the Ford Mondeo is a good car.' 



Clarkson interrupts to add: 'And that sandwich spread is delicious.'

'We agree on sandwich spread, Ford Mondeo - the old Ford Mondeo, that is -  and Europe, that's it. Those are the only things we agree on, nothing else,' Clarkson says.

Jeremy Clarkson (right) and James May (left) said they were 'fond' of Europe and staying in the EU was one of few issues they agree on - along with the views that the Ford Mondeo is a good car and 'sandwich spread is delicious'

David Cameron (middle) visited James May (left) and Jeremy Clarkson (right) at their TV studios in West London, where they are filming their new motoring show Grand Tour 

Explaining why they want Britain to stay in the EU, Clarkson says: 'But we do want to stay part of this - quite apart from anything else making our TV show, which is called the Grand Tour and involves touring the world and a lot of Europe, if we weren't in Europe, we'd have to get a carnet made every single time we  wanted to go to any one of these countries and that would take a hundred years. 

'And cost a lot of money,' May added.  

But viewers soon witnessed the old Clarkson and May as they descended into typical bickering over Swiss knives - which was sparked after Clarkson claimed Switzerland was a 'waste of time'.

The 1.50 minute YouTube clip, published by the Remain campaign, was filmed on Thursday when David Cameron visited the TV stars in their studio in West London.

Clarkson, a controversial figure after his sacking from the BBC last year, surprised many by endorsing the campaign to stay in the European Union. 

During the visit on Thursday, Clarkson said to the PM: 'It's an extraordinary thing that James and I only agree on three things, which is sandwich spread is delicious, the old Subaru Legacy Outback is a good car and Britain staying in.'

During an informal talk with Mr Cameron over cappuccinos in Stronger In-branded mugs and croissants, Clarkson added: 'I have not, with the greatest of respect, heard one politician say anything that's caused me to change my mind.

'There's huge numbers that don't understand and get confused. Really, it's my gut.'

 

