Could LONDON declare independence? After the capital's overwhelming vote against Brexit, calls grow for new Mayor Sadiq Khan to break away 

2016-6-24

Calls are growing for London Mayor Sadiq Khan to 'declare independence' after the capital overwhelmingly rejected Brexit.

Almost 65,000 people signed a petition asking the Labour Mayor to 'declare London independent, and apply to join the EU' - although it stops short of suggesting adopting the Euro is a good idea. 

The hashtag 'Londependence' has also started to trend on Twitter, with many of the capital's young residents tweeting their feelings under #notmyvote. 

Just five of London's borough's backed leaving the EU, with 60 per cent of the capital's voters siding with Remain.

The vote was at odds with the rest of Britain, where support for Remain dropped to just 48.1 per cent , while 53.2 per cent of English voters chose to leave.

Alliance? Sadiq Khan has already spoken to Nicola Sturgeon, who said today a new independence referendum is likely and said Scotland and London share a 'common cause'

Londoners also seem interested in independence, and have been showing their support for this petition, which calls for the capital to 'make the divorce official and move in with our friends on the continent'





While Khan is unlikely to take such petitions seriously, he did release a statement saying he still believed London was better off within the EU.

He also sent a message of support out to London's immigrants.

'I want to send a particular message to the almost one million Europeans living in London, who make a huge contribution to our city - working hard, paying taxes and contributing to our civic and cultural life. You are welcome here,' Khan said. 

'We value the enormous contribution you make to our city and that will not change as a result of this referendum.'  





But SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon today said she could call a new independence referendum within months - because thirds of Scottish voters backed staying in the EU yesterday.

During a speech she also revealed she had already spoken to  Khan because there is a 'is clear common cause between us'.

Scotland, like London, overwhelmingly chose to back Remain. 

Her comments gave hope to some who started using the hashtag #ScotLond, which began trending on Twitter.

Lucy Pasha-Robinson ‏tweeted: 'Do @NicolaSturgeon's discussions with @SadiqKhan mean #ScotLond is going to happen? Please? #EUref'.

Seyi Rhodes wrote: 'I'm so pleased to hear that @SadiqKhan has already spoken to @NicolaSturgeon about #ScotLondon'.





Supporters: Some have even created their own logo for the ScotLond movement - others have encouraged Sturgeon and Khan to 'keep talking'

Dudley Cruse said: 'I know it's probably silly, but #ScotLond is the only thing giving me hope right now'. 









@CaptainEllie tweeted: 'Half Scottish and my heart belongs to London, I'm all for #ScotLond'.

Workers in the Square Mile, the City of London, are bracing for months of pain as banks and financial institutions begin the process of considering whether to slash jobs or relocate to Europe in the wake of Brexit.

JP Morgan, HSBC and Goldman Sachs all said prior to the vote that thousands of jobs in the City of London could be moved to the continent in the event of Brexit.

Sarah Phillips, partner at solicitors Irwin Mitchell, said the Brexit vote will have a 'big impact' on people working in Britain's financial services sector.

She added: 'Many banks, insurers and fund managers who have large businesses in continental Europe could consider relocating to Paris or Frankfurt and senior staff will either lose their roles or have to move to another country.

All 32 local authorities in Scotland delivered a vote for Remain - Nicola Sturgeon this shows that her country was being pulled out against its will 





False hope: Some comments were a light-hearted escape for Remain supporters after a devastating result for them

'Some global investment banks, such as JPMorgan, have said that Brexit would lead to a significant loss of jobs in the UK.'

HSBC boss Stuart Gulliver said in February that a vote to leave could see 5,000 London-based investment bankers move out of London to Paris. Jamie Dimon, head of JP Morgan, said earlier this month that up to 4,000 jobs could be hit.

Although banks have been cautious on Friday in making any brash statements regarding their future plans, experts are forecasting that large scale redundancies could be on the cards.





The Mayor of London's office has strong links with Europe, and even has offices on the continent to bring in business.

But he lacks the power to maintain links with EU and will not defy yesterday's vote.

A Labour source told MailOnline: 'What they were talking about was to push for Britain to stay in the single market going forward.

'But Sadiq has said he will respect the will of the people on this and that London will continue to be a success'. 



