Nigel Farage dismisses fury over his pro-Brexit immigration poster and claims it only sparked such a row because Labour MP Jo Cox was KILLED

2016-6-19

Nigel Farage today insisted there would not have been such a 'row' over Ukip's controversial pro-Brexit immigration poster if Jo Cox had not been brutally killed.

The Ukip leader complained he was the 'victim' of hatred and insisted the party would be putting out more material focusing on the key issue of control over our borders.

The defence came as politicians from all sides in the EU referendum battle lined up to slam the 'racist' poster. 

Mr Farage unveiled the image - which featured the headline 'Breaking Point' over a photograph of refugees walking into Europe through Slovenia - on Thursday just hours before Labour MP Jo Cox was shot dead and the referendum battle was suspended.

Michael Gove today revealed he 'shuddered' when Ukip unveiled an anti-immigration poster featuring refugees just a week before the EU referendum.

The Justice Secretary said the poster, branded racist by critics, was the 'wrong thing to do'. 

Chancellor George Osborne, who supports the Remain campaign, also condemned the poster today as having 'echoes' of far right literature from the 1930s. 

Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon, Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond and Brexit-backing Labour MP John Mann all slammed the poster in interviews today.  



Michael Gove today told the BBC's Andrew Marr that he 'shuddered' when he saw the Ukip poster on immigration when it was unveiled last week  

Nigel Farage unveiled the controversial poster on Thursday, exactly a week before the EU referendum but was immediately condemned for the tone 

Mr Gove said: 'When I saw that poster, I shuddered. I felt it was the wrong thing to do.

'I must stress, I believe in free speech, I don't want to deny anyone a platform, and when I have had the opportunity to talk about migration during the course of this debate.

'I hope I have been very clear I am pro-migration but the way in which we secure public support for the continued benefits migration brings, the way we secure public support for helping refugees in need is if people feel they can control the numbers overall coming here.'

Chancellor George Osborne, who supports the Remain camaign, also condemned the poster today as having 'echoes' of far right literature from the 1930s.

Mr Osborne told ITV's Peston on Sunday: 'I think there is a difference between addressing those concerns [about immigration] in a reasonable way and whipping up concerns, whipping up division, making baseless assertions that millions of people are going to come into the country in the next couple of years from Turkey, or saying that dead bodies are going to wash up on the beaches of Kent – or, indeed, putting up that disgusting and vile poster that Nigel Farage did which had echoes of literature used in the 1930s.

'That is what we should say no to and this referendum vote is a vote on the kind of Britain we want.'

Mr Farage today rejected the charge of stoking up hatred, telling ITV interviewer Robert Peston: 'I think I have been a politician who has been a victim of it, to be honest with you.

'When you challenge the establishment in this country, they come after you, they call you all sorts of things. We saw the Chancellor a few minutes ago - despite the fact that overnight he talked about turning down the rhetoric - doing the same thing again.'

Despite his criticism of the Ukip poster, Mr Gove defended the official Vote Leave campaign's claims about immigration and particularly the possibility of Turkey joining the EU 

Asked if he wished he hadn't unveiled the poster, Mr Farage replied: 'I wish an innocent Member of Parliament hadn't been gunned down on the street.

'That's the point, and frankly had that not happened, I don't think we would have had the kind of row that we've had over it.'

He added: 'There was a big momentum developing right across the country, [then] a tragic death... It's difficult to see where either of the campaigns go.'

Mr Farage said: 'That poster reflects the truth of what's going on. We have a new poster coming out tomorrow morning and we'll unveil a new poster for every day.'

Mr Gove defended the claims on immigration made by his own campaign about Turkey, insisting it was not wrong to ensure migrant numbers are controlled.

Interviewed by the BBC's Andrew Marr, Mr Gove was challenged on Vote Leave leaflets which claim Turkey's high birth rate would mean a million more people having the right to come to Britain.

Mr Gove said: 'I think it is important to stress that when we are thinking about the enlargement of the European Union - and it is the official policy of the EU to accelerate Turkey's accession.

'I think the fact that both the British government and the EU want Turkey and other countries to join is clear. The rate and speed at which Turkey will join will depend on a variety of political factors.

'But it is the case that during the course of this year the EU want to accelerate that process and I think that when Turkey is becoming less democratic that is not the right thing to do.'

Mr Gove denied discussion of Turkey's birth rate made him 'queasy' and added: 'I think it is very important when we are talking about migration to take into account numbers overall as well.

'One of the things about numbers is that we benefit from migration if the numbers are controlled.' 



Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn today admitted he did not believe there could be limits placed on free movement in the EU as he claimed the Government was at fault for not giving communities resources to cope 

Scottish first minister and SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon today renewed her criticism of the Ukip poster.

She told Sky News: 'In these last few days I hope we can have a debate that doesn't focus on immigration.

'Yes, people's concerns about immigration need to be addressed, but let's also make the positive case for a world and a Europe where we all have the freedom of travel and the positive case for immigration and the benefits that brings to our economy.

'On that point, the poster that Nigel Farage unveiled last week was vile and racist and I hope he does agree today to withdraw that poster, because that kind of sentiment has no place in a civilised debate.'

Appearing on the BBC's Andrew Marr Show, Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn was asked directly whether he thought there should be an upper limit on the numbers coming to the UK.

Chancellor George Osborne today said the Ukip poster had 'echoes' of 1930s literature  

Mr Corbyn said: 'I don't think you can have one while you have the free movement of labour, and the free movement of labour means that you have to balance the economy.

'So you have to improve living standards and conditions and so that means the EU's appalling treatment of Greece is a problem.

'If you deliberately lower living standards and increase poverty in south eastern Europe, then you're bound to have a flow of people looking for somewhere to go.

'Surely the issue is an anti-austerity, growth package all across Europe rather than this.'

Defending his poster amid attacks from all sides of the political spectrum, Mr Farage claimed 'all' the people pictured in the poster will have EU passports within years.

'This is a statement about the whole of the European Union and politically I really do think that the European Union is at breaking point,' he told the BBC as he unveiled the poster in Westminster. 

Mr Farage today told ITV Vote Leave should answer for their own posters.

He said: 'Well, have you seen their posters? They've been doing very strong posters, not only about Turkey, but about the number of terrorists and criminals who come into Britain under free movement rules.'



