Brexit doesn't mean Hillary will lose the election, claims her campaign, after British ignored her demand they vote to stay in

2016-6-24

Hillary Clinton's campaign on Friday said the United Kingdom's decision to leave the European Union in order to take back control of its borders does not foreshadow a Donald Trump victory in November.

'The United States, different country than the United Kingdom,' Clinton Communications Director Jen Palmieri said Friday on a call with reporters. And it is 'also a very different election.'

At the same time, the campaign argued, Americans are going to look at the results of the Brexit vote and the effect it had on the worldwide economy and realize they want a steady hand on the wheel.

'People are looking for certainty, people are looking for solutions, and we think that that means people will be looking for Hillary Clinton,' Palmieri said on the call.



Clinton and her aides sought Friday to turn the former secretary of state's Brexit blunder into a positive for her presidential bid as it cast  Trump as self-centered and 'pathological' over his boast at a news conference that the chaos would be good for his business.

SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEO 









Hillary Clinton's campaign on Friday said the United Kingdom's decision to leave the European Union in order to take back control of its borders does not foreshadow a Donald Trump victory in November 

Americans are looking for 'steady leadership' in these tumultuous economic times, Palmieri said Friday.

The last thing the country needs is someone like Trump at the helm who is 'reckless, erratic and divisive,' she said.

Clinton's first priority is working families, her campaign said Friday. 'By contrast, Donald Trump actively rooted for this outcome, and he's rooting for the economic turmoil in its wake,' said Clinton senior policy adviser Jake Sullivan. 

The former US secretary of state sided with President Barack Obama and British Prime Minister David Cameron, leader of the 'Remain' campaign in the battle over the future of the UK.

It voted Thursday to defy them all and cut ties with the European Union, 52 to 48.

The country's astronomic number levels of immigration was a main point of contention as residents of the UK considered whether to part with the EU, which has an open border policy between member nations.



Republican White House hopeful Trump sided with the 'Leave' campaign and used a press conference today at his golf resort in Scotland to hammer Obama and his preferred successor.

Trump blasted Clinton for misreading the mood within the UK and said she and Obama are 'always wrong - and that's the problem with them.'

The Clinton campaign did not directly respond to his attacks as it took digs at him over his response to the crisis and it argued that the UK vote was 'profoundly different' that the one coming up in the United States for president.

'It's important that we recognize that this American election is about what's happening in America,' Sullivan said.

On the call today the Clinton's aides forcefully asserted that Trump is an 'egomaniac' and is 'temperamentally unfit' to hold higher office.

'Rather than think about or talk about what's good for the American people, he thinks about or talks about himself,' Sullivan said.

At his news conference today, at his Scottish golf resort, Turnberry, Trump celebrated the result of the Brexit vote and said, 'You know, when the pound goes down, more people are gonna come to Turnberry, frankly, and the pound has done down, and let's see what the impact of that is.'

Sullivan said the statement is part of an 'emerging Donald Trump playbook' - 'He engages in what can only be termed as pathological self congratulation.'

Clinton and her aides sought Friday to turn the former secretary of state's Brexit blunder into a positive for her presidential bid as it cast Trump as self-centered and 'pathological' over his boast at a news conference that the chaos would be good for his business

Clinton sided with President Barack Obama and British Prime Minister David Cameron (pictured together), leader of the 'Remain' campaign

'He actually put his golf business ahead of the interests of working families in the United States,' Sullivan charged. 

Hillary Clinton saw the Orlando terrorist attack and the Brexit through 'the lens of how they affect Americans and how they affect our working families,' Palmieri said. 'Donald Trump viewed them as opportunities to aggrandize himself.' 

'He proved again that he's willing to enrich himself at other’s expense,' she said.



Clinton did not make public remarks after the vote. She let her campaign - and her opponent - do all the talking.

She said today in a written statement, 'This time of uncertainty only underscores the need for calm, steady, experienced leadership in the White House.'

Drawing on her White House slogan 'stronger together' - also a motto of the 'remain' campaign - Clinton said Britain's shocking European Union exit 'underscores the need for us to pull together to solve our challenges as a country, not tear each other down.'  

Clinton attempted to turn the tables on Trump over his support for the 'Leave' campaign by implying that he would lead the United States off the same cliff if he takes over the Oval Office.

The United States needs an experienced leader 'to protect Americans' pocketbooks and livelihoods, to support our friends and allies, to stand up to our adversaries, and to defend our interests,' she said.

Her campaign piggybacked on that message during its press call later on Friday and said she have proven time and time again that she has the 'judgement, temperament and experience' to run the country.

'She also has the relationships to work with our allies in times of economic uncertainty,' Sullivan said. 'By contrast Donald Trump has consistently shown disregard for our friends and allies around the world.'

Asked today if he had talked to his foreign policy advisors, Trump said, 'There's nothing to talk about.'

Sullivan brought the remark up as he held it up as new proof Trump 'just makes things up.'  

Clinton began her statement by extending the same olive branch to the people of Britain as the sitting U.S. president.

'We respect the choice the people of the United Kingdom have made.,' she said. 'Our first task has to be to make sure that the economic uncertainty created by these events does not hurt working families here in America.'

She added, 'We also have to make clear America's steadfast commitment to the special relationship with Britain and the transatlantic alliance with Europe.'  

Clinton tepidly backed the 'Remain' campaign a day after Obama held a joint news conference with Cameron in Britain and forcefully argued in favor of his friend's position.

Sullivan, her senior policy adviser, said the next day that she agreed with Cameron and Obama.

'Hillary Clinton believes that transatlantic cooperation is essential, and that cooperation is strongest when Europe is united. She has always valued a strong United Kingdom in a strong EU. And she values a strong British voice in the EU,' he told the Observer.

A vote Remain poster lies discarded on the ground in London's Parliament Square after the Leave campaign won the EU referendum





Neither Clinton nor Obama acknowledged today in their statements that they came down on the wrong side of the vote, and it did not come up on the call with her advisers with the press. 





The president said in his statement, released half an hour before the one that came from the Clinton campaign, 'The people of the United Kingdom have spoken, and we respect their decision.

'The special relationship between the United States and the United Kingdom is enduring, and the United Kingdom’s membership in NATO remains a vital cornerstone of U.S. foreign, security, and economic policy.

'So too is our relationship with the European Union, which has done so much to promote stability, stimulate economic growth, and foster the spread of democratic values and ideals across the continent and beyond.'

Obama said both parties 'will remain indispensable partners of the United States even as they begin negotiating their ongoing relationship to ensure continued stability, security, and prosperity for Europe, Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the world.'

Later, in remarks at Stanford before an entrepreneurship event, he said Britain's relationship with the EU will evidently change as a result of Thursday's referendum.

'One thing that will not change is the special relationship that exists between our two nations,' he said.  

 



