'I’m shocked and fearful': Brexit forces British expats to become FRENCH because they are so scared of being sent home

2016-6-24

Two days before the Brexit vote, Nick and Allison Feeley, went to their local sous-prefecture to begin the process of taking French nationality.

Although convinced the UK would remain within the EU after the vote, they decided they’d better start to cover their backs. Just in case of a worse case scenario.

Now, in two months, after a language and knowledge test and an in-depth interview, they will, if all goes well, become citizens of the Republic of France.

It is not a move either of them foresaw, or necessarily wished for, when they left an increasingly stressful, difficult life in England to seek the good life, or dream, in La France Profonde amid the sunflower fields of the Tarn et Garonne.

Did not, in all their calculations, factor in a Brexit.

‘Now we see no other way to keep our life here,’ says Allison simply.

Two days before the Brexit vote, Nick and Allison Feeley, pictured outside their gites complex with daughters Megan, now 23, and Abigail, 14, went to their local sous-prefecture to begin the process of taking French nationality

Now, in two months, after a language and knowledge test and an in-depth interview, they will, if all goes well, become citizens of the Republic of France

In many ways we are already French citizens – we pay our taxes here, are domiciled here, our daughter is more French than English, and we’ve worked day and night for all we’ve got

‘But we intend to go for dual nationality. We could never cut off our links with Britain and God knows what the future holds for us in France.

‘But our lives are firmly here.

‘In many ways we are already French citizens – we pay our taxes here, are domiciled here, our daughter is more French than English, and we’ve worked day and night for all we’ve got.

‘We cannot see that taken away.’

Still shocked and they admit, surprisingly emotional, after the results and watching David Cameron’s resignation speech, Allison and Nick do not fit the perceived image of expats abroad.

They are not old, not retired and not the cartoon figures lampooned as ruddy-faced wine drinkers idling by a pool. In truth, only a small percentage of the estimated 300,000 Brits in France actually are.

Stunning: The Feeley family sold up their detached four bedroomed house in Newbury, Berkshire, and ploughed virtually every penny they had into a magnificent, if shabby, five-bedroomed manor house with two independent houses on site

Within months of moving in 2011 they had created a B&B suite in the main house and a website extolling the glories of their valley

Dating from the 1700s and nestled in its own little valley, the honey stone complex of farm buildings already had its own large pool and fishing lake

And far from lounging under the present temperatures of 30+degrees, they have spent ‘every hour God sends’ working ceaselessly to create a life and a business.

There are an estimated 2 million British nationals living in the EU.

The figure is a guess because many have not registered as actually being within the system.

Under Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty there is a two-year process, which has still to be triggered to begin the breakdown and breakaway of all reciprocal arrangements.

Meanwhile all are in legal limbo as to what ‘rights’ will be retained in a possible quid pro quo agreement for the thousands of EU foreign nationals living in the UK.

At the moment, EU membership gives the right to residence, to healthcare, schooling, maintenance payments and access to children, cross-border police and research information.

All is now up in the air including pensions and property, the main worry for many abroad.

France has already warned it will be a quick, even bitter divorce, but pragmatism is likely to kick in when faced with the problems of their own nationals heavily based in the London financial sector.

On healthcare alone, France, for example, reclaims from the UK the bills of British pensioners who have paid via National Insurance over the years into the Health Service.

If, as has to be the case, that goes, then expats will have to take out hefty insurance policies to cover the expensive, though excellent, provision in many parts of the EU.

Most on fixed incomes will be unable to afford it and will seek to return to the NHS, causing major problems for the UK.

‘We’ve worked harder, often physically harder, and longer than we ever did before,’ admits Alison, ‘But for life here it has been worth every moment.’ 

Now 51, Allison and Nick, 57, spent months searching for the perfect house and business before settling on a 2.5 hectare estate close to one of France’s plus beaux villages, Auvillar, in the Tarn et Garonne, six years ago.

Alison, a sales and marketing executive with an IT company and Nick, an executive with an American IT company appeared to have it all in England.

But when Nick was made redundant, Allison ended up juggling three jobs, as well as bringing up two young daughters, Megan, now 23 and Abigail, now 14.

‘We were stressed out frankly,’ remembers Allison. ‘We wanted, desperately needed, a better quality of life; a new life to get us off the treadmill we were on; a fresh start – something better.

‘There had to be more than this.’

Used to France from spending summers in the South with a pen pal, it seemed an obvious choice for Allison who already spoke good, if not fluent, French.

Plus it was close enough to go back and forth to the UK to see family and aging parents.

‘France was familiar, it was part of all we both knew and of course, being in the EU, easy to access, live and work in.’

They sold up their detached four bedroomed house in Newbury, Berkshire, and ploughed virtually every penny they had into a magnificent, if shabby, five-bedroomed manor house with two independent houses on site.

Dating from the 1700s and nestled in its own little valley, the honey stone complex of farm buildings already had its own large pool and fishing lake.

They bought from an elderly Baroness whose family had used it as a holiday house.

They arrived without their furniture and knew no one. Nick did not speak the language at all and even now admits to knowing only ‘builders’ French.’



Idyll: The family sold up after Nick lost his job. ‘We were stressed out frankly,’ remembers Allison. ‘We wanted, desperately needed, a better quality of life.

From scratch: The couple built up the shabby complex, with Nick doing everything from plumbing to stone stripping to pool maintenance.



But the couple was both realistic and commercially hardheaded in their aims.

Within months they had created a B&B suite in the main house and a web site extolling the glories of their valley.

Nick began work on the gites, learning as he went along everything from plumbing to stone stripping to pool maintenance.

Bit by bit they created two stunning gites aimed at a luxury market but keeping prices realistic.

Allison focused on the marketing; kept a contract job for a UK based American company in IT sales and when money was tight, crawled on all fours to pluck strawberries for a local farmer at 9 euros an hour.

Between them they formed links and friendships with the local community, and earned respect for all they were doing.



Luxury: The couple's website states 'many people find it hard to drag themselves away and revel in the fact that we offer truly child friendly gîtes and Bed and Breakfast'

Location: The complex is in Auvillar, a medieval bastide village with its unusual circular corn exchange and views over the Garonne valley



Their elder daughter, Megan, remained in England to finish her education and their youngest, Abigail, was thrown into the deep end of a French school with minimal language skills.

Today she has just taken the French equivalent of GCSEs as a boarder in one of the few private schools. It costs a mere €3000 a year.

Her anticipated University choice will be free; her accommodation grant given; even her transportation home at weekends. Education in France is a free right not a privilege for some.

‘All that though,’ says Allison, ‘is up in the air. ‘She will be a foreigner within the system once the deal goes through.

‘Hopefully though she won’t be once she is French like us. We couldn’t afford to send her back to the UK for either boarding school or university.

‘We have no fixed income. We are entitled to health care the same as the French as I am in the tax system and we have a mutuelle (an insurance) to top up the 70 per cent limit. 



Taste: The couple also run wine tours but say business has slowed this year and are now fearful of the effects of Brexit 

Concern: The Feeleys have applied for French nationality because they are so anxious about what how the Brexit result will affect them

‘People think everything is cheap in France. Once upon a time, perhaps. No longer. All our taxes and social charges continue to rise.

‘The last two years we’ve seen a worrying drop in business. People are worried because of the terrorism and the state of emergency.

‘The £/€ fluctuates so much they put off coming. This year for the first time we have no bookings, not one, in September.

‘And now…this.’

Outside, the heat pulses and from every window there is a bucolic view of haystacks, sunflower buds and a heat haze covering gently rising hills.

 I suggest that perhaps back in the UK there are many who would feel no sympathy for their plight – after all there are no fixed income guarantees there either.

‘Of course not,’ says Allison immediately. ‘And we’re not asking for any. We have always, and still do, paid our way and worked our way in life. 



Haven: The gites complex was the family's refuge from a stressful life in Britain but the Brexit result has left them fearing for the future

Beauty: The Feeleys take pride in the comfort and luxury of the accommodation they run but are worried about their livelihoods following the Brexit result

‘Perhaps it would be easier to return, to look for jobs in our own language, to find work whatever it was. Definitely less work than we do here.

‘But this, this, is our life. We are part of this country now. We took the chance, the leap, and not blindly. At this moment I’m shocked, emotional and yes, fearful, frightened of what is to come.

‘We are in limbo.’

The couple, naturally, unlike it seems a number of expats, registered and voted. Obviously for remain?

Nick says: ‘Yes but it was last minute. I, we, was going to vote for leave.

‘I believed all that Farage said about the bloated EU and how the money would go to the NHS. All lies. It was only in the end when people like the Governor of the Bank of England pointed out the financial facts that I understood.

‘For us it was never, ever about immigration. We are immigrants ourselves. And we do believe that there are many things wrong with the EU, many excesses but ultimately, we are better in than out.

‘ Too late now.' 



Empty: In the last few months as business dwindled Allison has also become an independent estate agent, paid only on sale

Job loss: Despite the beauty of the surroundings the family are concerned because Allison's contract job with the US company is likely to go in July, because they are outsourcing everything to cheaper Czechoslovakia

In the last few months as business dwindled Allison has also become an independent estate agent, paid only on sale. Her contract job with the US company is likely to go in July as they are outsourcing everything to cheaper Czechoslovakia.

She laughs: ‘Houses are already not selling even at rock bottom prices. Little chance of the Brits buying now with the uncertainty and the £/€ situation.

‘At this moment, I can’t see what else we can do except wait, hope we can survive somehow and….’

There is often little sympathy for those many in the UK see as having jumped ship for the good, cheap life abroad. Even a slight gloating as to what may be to come for them now.

But couples like Nick and Allison perhaps show that being in the EU was much, much more than that.

By Nick Fagge in Paris for MailOnline

A retired teacher, a widow and a businessman living in the Dordogne have revealed the financial hardship they face as the value of the pound plummets against the Euro.

And they warned of the unintended consequences – including the cost of healthcare and the falling value of their property.

Widow Dorothy Smith, 85, originally from Chorley, Lancs, told MailOnline: ‘I think it’s a very bad thing for expats living in France and everyone.

‘I stayed up until 5 o’clock in the morning to wait for the outcome and I could believe it. All those stupid people saying stupid things throughout the campaign.

‘I was planning to sell my house here in France and go back to England. But I won’t be able to do that now because no one will want to buy it with the value of the pound falling.

‘I have a few savings in a French bank account but I mostly rely on my state pensions.

‘It is fair to say that I am struggling to get by on as it is.

‘But I own my home and my son and grandchildren live near me here in France.

‘I fought very hard to be able to vote in this referendum and I voted to remain. But in the end it didn’t make any difference.’

Retired teacher Brian Hinchcliffe, 70, moved to France with wife Jenny from Tyneside in 2000.

The Brexit vote will have profound consequences for him and other expats in the Dordogne, he warned.

‘It feels like a death in the family,’ Mr Hinchcliffe told MailOnline.

‘We accepted there was going to be vote about whether to stay in or get out of the EU but we really did not expect this result. We both feel terrible about the outcome.

‘We had planned to go out for a drink tonight with our expat friends to celebrate a vote to remain. But now it is going to seem more like a wake.

‘We will now have to ask our American friends about all the red tape and hoops they must jump through to live in France, now we will no longer be part of the EU.

‘Our daughter works at a call centre in Newcastle where most of the staff are from other EU countries. She says she is going to have to apologise to them today.

‘We moved to France in 2000 and because we have been here for over 15 yeasr we were not allowed to vote in the referendum.

‘Almost all of the British people we know who live here in France want to stay in the EU. There is only one guy who was for Leave and he spent his working life in Dubai so he can afford it.

‘We live off my pension which is paid in pounds so the fall in the value of the pound will affect us.

‘When the pound fell to almost parity with the euro a few years ago we struggled.

‘In fact the fall in the value of the pound meant a lot of friends could no longer afford to live here and had to return to Britain.

‘Out of a group of 20 expat couple there are only four of us left.

‘And there are worries about healthcare. Currently we are treated under the French system in which the NHS picks up the majority of the cost. We will have to get insurance to cover us.’

Expat businessman Andrew Smith, 59, blamed older voters for jeopardising the future of young Britons.

He told MailOnline: ‘I think Brexit will be a disaster.

‘I don’t know how much it will affect me because I run my own business here in France, but it a backward step.

‘I think it is selfish of the older people to vote to leave the EU when it is the young people – who are in favour of remaining inside – who are going to have to live with the consequences.

‘They seem to think that Britain is still an important colonial power that is simply a thing of the past.’



