Jo Cox's widower says the MP died for her 'very strong' views and was worried that politics was becoming too extreme

2016-6-21

The widower of MP Jo Cox has said he believes the mother of his two children was killed because of her 'very strong' political views. 

Brendan Cox said his 41-year-old wife 'would want to stand up for those views as in death as much as she did in life'.

Speaking publicly for the first time since his wife's death last Thursday, he added that she had concerns about the culture of politics around the world. 

Scroll down for video 



Widower Brendan Cox, pictured, believes his wife Jo was killed because of her 'very strong' political views 

The father-of-two said his wife, pictured, had been 'worried about the tone' of the EU referendum debate

Mrs Cox, MP for Bately and Spen, was stabbed and shot as she arrived for a surgery in her constituency of Birstall, near Leeds.

Had she lived, she would have been out on the streets campaigning for a Remain vote in the EU referendum, Mr Cox said.

But she was 'worried about the tone of the debate' amid concerns it was 'whipping up fears and whipping up hatred potentially'.

Asked whether he was concerned about people using her death in public debate, Mr Cox told the BBC: 'She was a politician and she had very strong political views and I believe she was killed because of those views.

'I think she died because of them, and she would want to stand up for those in death as much as she did in life.'  

He added: 'I think she was very worried that the language was coarsening, that people were being driven to take more extreme positions, that people didn't work with each other as individuals and on issues, it was all much too tribal and unthinking. 





Mr Cox said his wife Jo (pictured together) had concerns about the culture of politics around the world



'And she was particularly worried  about the direction of, not just in the UK but globally, the direction of politics at the moment, particularly around creating division and playing on people's worst fears rather than their best instincts. So we talked about that a lot and it was something that worried her.' 



Mrs Cox would have celebrated her 42nd birthday tomorrow. A number of events including a rally in Trafalgar Square have been planned to mark the occasion. 

Yesterday Mr Cox and his children watched from the public gallery as MPs paid tribute to their colleague in an emotional session in the Commons. 

Mr Cox said the public outpouring of emotion would help in their children, three-year-old daughter Lejla and son Cuillin, five.

Brendan Cox tweeted this poignant picture of his wife and two children camping, saying he had taken their son and daughter on a camping trip because it was one of their favourite activities as a family

He said: 'The two things that I've been very focused on is how do we support and protect the children, and how do we make sure that something good comes out of this.

'And what the public support and outpouring of love around this does, is it also helps the children see that what they're feeling and other people are feeling, that the grief that they feel, isn't abnormal, that they feel it more acutely and more painfully and more personally, but that actually their mother was someone who was loved by lots of people and that therefore, it's OK to be upset and it's OK for them to cry and to be sad about it.' 



Mr Cox also said he would not stand for his wife's former seat, indicating he would like a woman to take his wife's place in Parliament.  

That would mean there are 100 female Labour MPs 'so I think that will be a lovely symbolism,' he added.  





