Donald Trump says 'always wrong Obama' and Clinton pushed the British out of Europe by lecturing them to stay - and Americans will be next 'to take their country back'

2016-6-24

Donald Trump has dramatically said President Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton pushed into Britain leaving the European Union - and predicted Americans will make a similar choice in November.

He said the president - who in April lectured Britain that it must stay in and threatened it with dire economic consequences if it left - and his would-be Democratic successor had misread the mood of the free world  

'She's always misread everything, if you think. She's misread this,' Trump told DailyMail.com of Clinton, during a press conference coinciding with the re-opening of a golf course in the west of Scotland.

Both Obama and Clinton urged Britons to vote with the 'Remain' forces, which lost by a 52-48 margin.

The result is bragging rights for Trump, who had said that while he wouldn't tell UK voters what to do, if it were up to him he would choose to make Great Britain 'independent' of Brussels.



SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEO 

Slamming Obama: 'I was actually very surprised that President Obama would've come over here and he would have been so bold as to tell the people over here what to do,' Trump said

They're to blame: Obama put Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama in the frame for the UK's decision to quit the European Union 

Family affair: Donald Trump traveled to his Ayrshire resort of Turnberry with (from left) his son Eric, daughter Ivanka and son Donald Jr

Key figure: Ivanka Trump also spoke at the press conference at the Trump resort. She and his other children will run the firm if he becomes president, he said

Family travel: Ivanka Trump was accompanied by her niece Kai Madison Trump, her brother Donald Jr's eldest daughter. Trump said he went to Turnberry 'to support his kids'

Obama's lecture to Britain:

I actually think his recommendation... caused it to fail.

Hillary telling Britain to remain:

The only reason she did it is because Obama wanted it. If Obama wanted it the other way, if he said 'Leave', she would have said 'Leave'.

Why Britain voted out:

People want to take their country back. They want to have independence in a sense.

A new referendum on Scottish independence:

I don't know that people want to go through that again.

Parallels to the presidential election: 

When people pour into the country, it doesn't work, whether because of crime or other things. You can't unite a country by forcing things down people's throats.



Obama, he said, is 'constantly dictating to the world what they should do. The world doesn't listen to him, obviously. You can see that from the vote.

'I actually think his recommendation ... caused it to fail,' he claimed.

As America's election process becomes more heated, Trump will likely throw the Brexit vote at Clinton as evidence that the women who was once the top U.S. diplomat no longer has her finger on the world's pulse.

'The only reason she did it is because Obama wanted it,' he said of Clinton's anti-exit advocacy. 'If Obama wanted it the other way, if he said "Leave," she would have said "Leave." She does whatever he wants her to do.'

'And you know why,' he added, trailing off. Trump has said in past campaign events that Clinton is toeing Obama's line on a range of issues because she fears a federal indictment over the classified documents found last year among her private emails.

Trump had equally little patience with Obama on Friday.

'I was actually very surprised that President Obama would've come over here and he would have been so bold as to tell the people over here what to do,' he said.

'And I think that a lot of people don't like him, and a lot of people voted – if he had not said it, I think the result might have been different.'

'I thought it was inappropriate,' Trump reiterated, 'and then [Clinton] doubled down and she did the same thing.'

'And obviously, for the 219th time, they were wrong. They're always wrong. And that's the problem with them.'

Trump told reporters that he sees 'a big parallel' with his messages back home.

'I love to see people take their country back, and that's what's happening in the United States,' he said.

'People want to take their country back. They want to have independence in a sense,' Trump boomed, hinting at his campaign themes of pushing back against a tide of illegal immigrants entering the U.S. from Mexico.

Lone protester: One man - serial British 'prankster' Lee Nelson made it through extensive security to throw swastika-embellished gold balls towards Donald Trump's feet

Symbolic protest: 'Sorry Mr. Trump. I forgot to hand them out!' the protester said of the balls.  'Get him out,' the billionaire said, prompting U.S. Secret Service and other security forces to haul him away.

At his course: 'People want to take their country back. They want to have independence in a sense,' he said, at a press conference on his Turnberry golf course in Ayrshire, south-west Scotland

'People want to see borders. They don't necessarily want people pouring into their country that they don't know who they are,' he said.

Speaking on the 9th tee of Trump Turnberry against the dramatic, sea-swept backdrop of his landmark Scottish resort, Trump wore a white 'Make America Great Again' hat and praised the staff who rebuilt the on-site hotel and redesigned large parts of the golf course where the British open has been played.

Trump's opening was upstaged by a lone protester - serial British 'prankster' Lee Nelson - who made it through the security cordons and wore a Trump Turnberry sweater.

He tossed a few red golf balls bearing Nazi swastikas at Trump's feet, announcing that they were the new driving range balls for the golf course.

'Sorry Mr. Trump. I forgot to hand them out!' he said, his hands holding two more balls and shaking in the moment as close to 150 cameras focused on him.

'Get him out,' the billionaire said, prompting U.S. Secret Service and other security forces to haul him away.

Scotland's 'right to roam' laws make it unusually challenging for authorities to secure outdoor spaces. The anti-Trump activist, security staff said, simply walked onto the golf course unchallenged.

Beyond Brexit, Trump said he wouldn't be surprised to see the whole of the EU break apart, saying that 'it looks like it's on its way and we'll see what happens.'

He said 'proud' German friends of his who are accustomed to 'bragging about their country' are now fleeing their homeland because of the flood of migrants welcomed by Chancellor Angela Merkel.

'Building safe zones in Syria - great idea,' he said, but criticized Europe for embracing refugees by the trainload.

Promised protest: Left-wing activists had claimed that thousands of protesters would descend on Turnberry but in the event there were tiny numbers 

Is that it? This was the protest expected to number in the thousands. Trump said, 'We counted them. There were 43.'

Heavy security: Mounted police were deployed in case of trouble but the numbers of left-wing anti-Trump activists were extremely small

And he predicted that Americans would ultimately come down against their government 'taking them into the United States by the thousands. We don't know who they are.'

'When people pour into the country, it doesn't work, whether because of crime or other things,' he said. 'You can't unite a country by forcing things down people's throats.'

But he stopped short at the notion that Texas, Vermont or another independent-minded U.S. state might take a cue from the Brexit vote and start a bona fide secession movement.

DailyMail.com asked him on a post-presser rope line if he was concerned about a 'Texit' or a 'Vermexit.'

'Oh, yeah!' he piped up, laughing uproariously. 'That'll be next, right?'

The billionaire's staff promised a press conference, 'rain or shine.' Despite a downpour nearby in the mid-morning hours, Mother Nature stayed the clouds and a hot sun beat down, cooking TV camera crews and baking off a morning coating of fog.

By the time The Donald made his entrance, complete with a bagpiper as his herald, the heat and calm winds could be mistaken for an April day in Miami.

The people of the United Kingdom have exercised the sacred right of all free peoples. 

They have declared their independence from the European Union, and have voted to reassert control over their own politics, borders and economy. 

A Trump Administration pledges to strengthen our ties with a free and independent Britain, deepening our bonds in commerce, culture and mutual defense. 

The whole world is more peaceful and stable when our two countries – and our two peoples – are united together, as they will be under a Trump Administration.

Come November, the American people will have the chance to re-declare their independence. 

Americans will have a chance to vote for trade, immigration and foreign policies that put our citizens first. 

They will have the chance to reject today’s rule by the global elite, and to embrace real change that delivers a government of, by and for the people.

I hope America is watching, it will soon be time to believe in America again.

Making the trip with Trump were his daughter Ivanka, son Eric, their spouses, and son Donald Jr, and grandson Kai Madison Trump - Donald Jr's daughter. 

Trump's wife Melania stayed home in New York, according to a campaign aide.

The results of Thursday's 'Brexit' vote were nearly guaranteed to dominate the anticipation of Friday morning's event.

Trump called the vote 'truly historic' during the press conference.

A majority of about 52 percent of voters chose to exit the European Union, sending the value of the British Pound into free-fall and panicking investors across the globe.

But to Trump, whatever pain comes is the price of freedom – and a nose-dive form the Pound could bring with it a tourism boost throughout Great Britain.

He said in a statement after the stunning results came in that if he should become the U.S. president, his administration would 'strengthen our ties with a free and independent Britain, deepening our bonds in commerce, culture and mutual defense.'

'The whole world is more peaceful and stable,' he said, 'when our two countries – and our two peoples – are united together, as they will be under a Trump administration.'

'Come November, the American people will have the chance to re-declare their independence,' he added.

'Americans will have a chance to vote for trade, immigration and foreign policies that put our citizens first.'

'I hope America is watching,' he concluded.

Trump himself said this week that if it had been up to him, the 'Leave' vote would prevail – and it did.

President Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton both backed the 'Remain' side of the contentious referendum.

Whoever the next American president is, he or she will have to build bridges with a new British prime minister.

David Cameron said Friday that he would step down by October and give a new PM the task of managing the two-year process of unwinding Britain's ties with Brussels.

Scotland, the land of Trump's mother's birth, provided an odd political backdrop for Trump, as its voters were strongly against leaving the EU – by a 62-38 margin.

Its citizens are now expected to hold a second independence vote of their own, which could pull them out of Great Britain and set them up to separately rejoin the EU.

'That's up to the people of Scotland. We've been through this,' Trump said Friday.

Pointing the finger: It was on this presidential visit to the UK that Obama told the country it would 'be at the back of the queue' for trade deals if it voted out. Trump today said that probably tipped voters to leave

The billionaire arrived in his 'Trump' emblazoned helicopter at the Turnberry resort in South Ayrshire to officially open the revamped resort he bought in 2014, just an hour after Prime Minister David Cameron said he intended to stand down in October

But citing a 'very, very close vote' the first time around, he said: 'I don't know that people want to go through that again.'

A small gaggle of protesters lined the Turnberry country road approaching Friday's event, including one holding a small sign that read: 'Listen to us and then GO HOME.'

Trump proudly announced on Friday that despite predictions of thousands of demonstrators, only 43 showed up.

'We counted them,' he boasted. 'They said there would be thousands.'

Trump Turnberry is one of nine branded properties where the Republican presidential candidate has held press events in 2015 and 2016, including a host of golf courses, Trump Tower, his Mar-a-Lago club in Palm Beach, Florida, and a hotel under construction in Washington, D.C.

He is expected to make an appearance Saturday at another Trump golf course in Aberdeen, a five-hour drive to the northeast.

The real estate tycoon bristled against a question about why he was in Scotland instead of campaigning in the U.S., saying he was there 'because I support my children.'

The Trump kids, particularly Eric, were responsible for the Turnberry property's redevelopment.

'This is, a little bit, what we're going to do to the United States,' he said, complaining about the nation's 'rotting infrastructure ... the bridges are a disaster. The roads are a disaster.'

'It's a place that has to be fixed. And there's nobody who knows how to fix things like me,' Trump boasted.

And in a parting shot to Clinton, he declared that his campaign against her had only just begun.

'Ohio's even, Pennsylvania's even, the national polls are getting very close,' he observed.

'She's spent a lot of money, and we're even!'

