'Freedom, liberty and justice will prevail over the hate that killed her': Osborne cancels a major referendum speech to issue a defiant and emotional tribute to Jo Cox 

2016-6-16

George Osborne last night cancelled a major address on the economy and referendum to pay an emotional tribute to Jo Cox after she was killed in Leeds

George Osborne last night cancelled a major address on the economy and referendum to pay an emotional tribute to Jo Cox.

He said all MPs had been rocked by the 'appalling, shattering news' of Mrs Cox's death when it was confirmed by West Yorkshire Police shortly after 5pm.

But a week before a democratic vote that will define his career, Mr Osborne said 'freedom, liberty and justice' would prevail over the 'hatred that killed her'.

The Chancellor welcomed the decision to suspend campaigning on the EU referendum with less than a week to polling day out of respect for the tragic events in Birstall.

Mr Osborne, speaking at the annual Mansion House dinner, said Mrs Cox had died 'serving her constituents, serving our democracy'.



And Mr Osborne reflected on how all MPs making themselves available to their constituents is 'one of the virtues of our Parliamentary democracy'.

He said: 'It's what makes the way we govern ourselves very different from many others.

'To be an effective representative, all of us who are MPs engage with their communities, talk to everyone and anyone, hold constituency surgeries and must be prepared to stand up and argue publicly for what we believe.

'Jo did all of these things.'

The Chancellor said the Batley and Spen MP had been 'liked and respected across the House' after making an immediate impact since her election last year.

He said shed changed attitudes and helped change Government policy despite being a new, backbench, opposition MP.

Mr Osborne said: ' She will never know how many lives she helped transform.

'Today, doing that job, she senselessly lost her own life.

'Not since Ian Gow lost his life to an IRA bomb twenty six years ago has an MP been murdered, but others since have faced attack, injury and intimidation.'

Mr Osborne said all MPs had been rocked by the 'appalling, shattering news' of Mrs Cox's death when it was confirmed by West Yorkshire Police shortly after 5pm 

Mr Osborne, speaking at the annual Mansion House dinner, said Mrs Cox had died 'serving her constituents'

The Chancellor appeared deep in thought with his head bowed as he sat at the dinner at Mansion House

The Chancellor continued: ' We believe in Parliamentary democracy.

'MPs have the privilege of representing the views of those who voted for them and those who did not. We believe in tolerance.

'In the words of her husband, Brendan, Jo would have wanted us to unite against the hatred that killed her. Hate doesn't have a creed, race or religion. It is poisonous.

'And we believe in freedom, liberty and justice.'

Mr Osborne said the day's 'horrible events' were an 'assault on all these values'.

But in a defiant conclusion, he said: 'But we know that these values, no matter how they have been challenged in the past, have always prevailed, prevail today and they will always prevail.

'For they are the values of Great Britain, our great democracy.' 

