Are your neighbours IN or OUT? Interactive map reveals the most and least Eurosceptic areas of Britain ahead of EU referendum

2016-6-22





























As voters finally get their chance to vote on Britain's EU membership tomorrow, this interactive map allows readers to find out how their decision whether to Leave or Remain compares to that of their neighbours. 



A survey of 80,000 Britons revealed the top ten most eurosceptic areas are all in England with Havering in London, Peterborough in Cambridgeshire and Bracknell in Berkshire topping the list.

The YouGov research also shows that euroscepticism is linked to lower income, although it is also very strong in the more wealthy Tory shire counties of England like Suffolk, Somerset and Lincolnshire. 

Britain appears deeply divided over its attitudes towards the EU. In this graphic red represents the most Eurosceptic areas of the country, such as Cumbria, while the most Europhile are green - such as London.

Labour strongholds in the north like Hull, Doncaster and Barnsley are also leaning towards a Brexit, researchers found.

In contrast London contains five of the top 10 most europhile areas, including wealthy left-leaning boroughs like Camden, where Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn is an MP.

The remaining five europhile areas are outside England with Ceredigion in Wales named the least Eurosceptic area of Britain - and Scotland is by far the most pro-EU country in the UK.

Staying in the EU is more heavily backed in cities where the population is younger and where there are large universities, including in Liverpool, Manchester, York and Bristol.

With the last polls before tomorrow's historic referendum showing the result is too close to call, campaigners on both sides of the debate are taking part in a last-minute media blitz across the UK.  

The map, which shows Eurosceptic areas in red and Europhile areas in green, shows deep divides across the south of England

YouGov data also reveals deep splits over tomorrow's vote across the nation.  

While London and Scotland break strongly for Remain, Wales, the Midland and the North look set on a Leave vote.

Voters aged over 50 are leading the charge for Brexit but those aged 18 to 24 are set to heavily back the campaign to keep Britain inside the EU. 





Contrast: The top ten eurosceptic areas are all in England - the most europhile are split between London, Wales and Scotland 

Correlation: The dotted line shows a calculation linking average income and euroscepticism in the UK - and the dots show that the poorer you are the more likely to you are to back a Brexit

Polls show the referendum going down to the wire and the Remain campaign will hope a late celebrity endorsement will help push them over the line

Data gathered by YouGov for The Times revealed deep splits within Britain on the EU referendum question as different sectors of the population appear set to vote in different ways on Thursday 

