'This vote doesn't represent the younger generation who will have to live with the consequences': Millennials vent fury at baby boomers for voting Britain OUT of the EU

2016-6-24

Millennials have slammed baby boomers for voting Britain out of the EU as furious crowds of young people protest in London.

Young Britons voted in their droves in favour of the Remain campaign with an incredible 72 per cent of 18 to 24-year-olds against a Brexit.

However despite their efforts, Leave won the referendum with 52 per cent thanks to the majority of older voters in England and Wales.

In response, Brits carrying placards and flags have staged a protest through the streets of London today, taking them from the Houses of Parliament, to Downing Street and London Bridge.

Many wore face paint and ignited flares as the hundreds of Britons marched towards the Shard, some carrying signs with the slogans 'no borders' and 'refugees welcome'. 





Up to 500 protesters marched from Aldgate in east London and across London Bridge, some wielding flares

Protesters gather outside 10 Downing Street following the news of a Brexit and David Cameron's resignation

Millennials have slammed baby boomers for voting Britain out of the EU with crowds protesting in Westminster

Protesters gather outside outside the Houses of Parliament on the day British Prime Minister David Cameron announcing his resignation

Harriet Barclay covered herself in fake blood to make her point, while others held up signs and placards

A young couple painted as EU flags protest outside Downing Street against the United Kingdom's decision to leave the EU

Despite the efforts of young voters, Leave won the referendum with 52 per cent thanks to the majority of older voters in England and Wales

Protesters hold placards with slogans such as ' In the European Cup' outside the Houses of Parliament

Figures by YouGov revealed that 56 per cent of 50 to 64-year-olds voted for a Brexit and many young people took to social media to complain that they have been let down by the older generation.

Lily Bowen wrote: 'Older generations really don't realise how badly this will affect our future #EUref.'

While Matt Cooper tweeted: 'Brilliant, once again the older generations get to decide what's best and we've got to pickup the pieces #EUref.'

Grace ‏Lansbury posted: 'Very disappointing result, I hope older generations and even those of my generation understand the repercussions of this outcome #EUref.'

Jon Gleeson ‏said: 'Want to thank the older generations for once again screwing us over. Cheers, we'll keep carrying the can for your mistakes. #EUref'

Anti-Brexit protesters demonstrate at the gates of Downing Street in central London after the UK voted to leave the European Union



A women covered in fake blood makes her point outside Westminster during a demonstration this afternoon

Young Britons, including this protester who covered herself in fake blood, voted in their droves in favour of the Remain campaign with an incredible 72 per cent of 18 to 24-year-olds against a Brexit

While crowds protested outside the Houses of Parliament others took to social media to vent their anger

Anti-Brexit protesters made their point at the gates of Downing Street in central London after the UK voted to leave the European Union

The latest figures by YouGov have revealed that 56 per cent of 50 to 64-year-olds voted for a Brexit and many young people have taken to social media to complain that they have been let down by their parents' generation

Police direct cyclists near Downing Street as hundreds of people protest following today's referendum result

As some young people vented their anger on social media, others pounded the streets in Westminster with placards and banners in protest.

Wearing face paint and holding signs that bared slogans such as 'I am not British I am European' made their feelings known.

Below are the latest figures from pollsters YouGov,revealing that young people voted in their droves for the Remain campaign. 

18-24: 75% Remain

25-49: 56% Remain

50-64: 44% Remain

65+: 39% Remain



As the young generations share their dismay at the future of the nation, Boris Johnson has  made a pitch to be the Prime Minister of a new 'great' Britain outside the EU.

Triumphant Brexiteer Mr Johnson started to set out his vision for a revitalised, outward looking country in a speech just hours after his long-time rival tearfully declared that he would stand aside in the wake of the referendum Brexit vote.

Flanked by wife Samantha in Downing Street, David Cameron said he had been 'proud' to serve as Prime Minister for the past six years.

But he said it would not be right for him to be the 'captain of the ship' while the UK negotiated its exit from the EU. 

It is now clear that whoever is in Downing Street will face a struggle to hold the UK together - as SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon warned it was now 'highly likely' that a second ballot on independence will be held north of the border. 

There were many sad faces on show in London today as hundreds reacted to the news of a Brexit from the EU

As the young generations share their dismay at the future of the nation, Boris Johnson has made a pitch to be the Prime Minister of a new 'great' Britain outside the EU, much to the dismay of protesters today

As some young people vented their anger on social media, others pounded the streets in Westminster with placards and banners in protest

Wearing face paint and holding signs that bared slogans such as 'I am not British I am European', young voters made their feelings known





