Banking giants consider moving thousands of jobs out of Britain after Brexit vote as big businesses warn of a profits slump

2016-6-24

City rocked: Banking giant JP Morgan is reportedly considering moving staff from his London HQ to Paris after today's Brexit vote

Several of the world's biggest banks are already considering sending  thousands of jobs out of Britain after today's Brexit win.

JP Morgan, the globe's biggest investment bank, and BNP Paribas, France's financial giant, are reportedly looking at whether they should now move their London bases to Paris.

But American giant Morgan Stanley has denied rumours that it is planning to move 2,000 investment banking jobs to Frankfurt and Dublin.

It came as British Airways owner IAG  issued a profit warning following the UK's decision to leave the EU.

The company's share price tanked 19 per cent to 425.6p in trading on Friday morning.





City workers  are braced for months of pain as banks and financial institutions begin the process of considering whether to slash jobs or relocate to Europe in the wake of Brexit. 

HSBC and Goldman Sachs all said prior to the vote that thousands of jobs in the City of London could be moved to the continent in the event of Brexit.

Sarah Phillips, partner at solicitors Irwin Mitchell, said the Brexit vote will have a 'big impact' on people working in Britain's financial services sector.

She added: 'Many banks, insurers and fund managers who have large businesses in continental Europe could consider relocating to Paris or Frankfurt and senior staff will either lose their roles or have to move to another country.

'Some global investment banks, such as JPMorgan, have said that Brexit would lead to a significant loss of jobs in the UK.'

HSBC boss Stuart Gulliver said in February that a vote to leave could see 5,000 London-based investment bankers move out of London to Paris. 

Jamie Dimon, head of JP Morgan, said earlier this month that up to 4,000 jobs could be hit.

Although banks have been cautious on Friday in making any brash statements regarding their future plans, experts are forecasting that large scale redundancies could be on the cards.

Virgin founder Richard Branson said today it 'a very sad decision that will do huge damage to Britain's prosperity & Europe's stability'

O2 Telefónica UK chief Ronan Dunne said: 'Whatever we think on IN/OUT, people were simply unconvinced by the case to #Remain. We have failed our citizens rather than them failing us.'

Dixons Carphone Warehouse boss Sebastian James said: 'Feels strange and unsettling following the vote but we are the same, our company is the same, and our job is the same. Making people happy'.

Nick Elwell-Sutton, partner at Clyde & Co, said: 'At a more fundamental level, unless the financial services passporting rules are resolved in the UK's favour, then many large financial services businesses are likely to relocate to within the EU - meaning large scale redundancies would be highly probable.' 





Many banks and businesses joined the Remain campaign and warned of catastrophe have today looked to reassure instead.

Goldman Sachs boss Lloyd Blankfein has said the bank respects the decision of the British electorate, while HSBC chairman Douglas Flint said that 'we are today entering a new era for Britain and British business'.

Dixons Carphone Warehouse boss Sebastian James said: 'Feels strange and unsettling following the vote but we are the same, our company is the same, and our job is the same. Making people happy'.

Some banks could be sending its London traders out of the UK after today's vote, but Morgan Stanley has denied it is one of them today

Virgin founder Richard Branson said today it  'a very sad decision that will do huge damage to Britain's prosperity & Europe's stability'.

O2 Telefónica UK chief Ronan Dunne said: 'Whatever we think on IN/OUT, people were simply unconvinced by the case to #Remain. We have failed our citizens rather than them failing us.'



Tim Martin, founder and chairman of Wetherspoons: 'The UK is in an immensely strong position/ The referendum result will enhance freedom and security.

'Some people will now be anxious, but concentrating on these immensely important factors will provide reassurance.

'Anxiety about the economic effects of independence during the campaign was misplaced.

'The UK will thrive as an independent country, making its own laws, and we will work with our good friends and neighbours in Europe and elsewhere to ensure a positive outcome for all parties. 



Oil and gas experts Royal Dutch Shell said: 'Although Shell was in favour of the UK remaining in the EU, we respect the decision of the majority of the British people who voted to elect to leave.

'We will work with the UK government and European institutions on any implications for us. Our priority is to continue providing reliable, affordable energy to our customers in Europe and the UK.'

David Sproul, chief executive of Deloitte UK: 'We are likely to see a period of uncertainty'

'The British public have spoken and made clear that they see the UK's interests best-served by leaving the European Union. While the UK has opted for a future outside the EU, Britain remains a competitive, innovative and highly-skilled economy and an attractive place for business'. 

