'If you stay in the EU, we will acknowledge the 1966 Wembley goal and reserve sun loungers for you with our towels':German tabloid Bild offers 11 hilarious bribes as Europe's media pleads for UK to stay

2016-6-23

German tabloid Bild has offered 11 hilarious bribes in a bid to urge Britain to reject Brexit - even vowing to finally recognise Geoff Hurst's disputed goal in the 1966 World Cup final.

In another offer to English voters in the EU referendum, the country's most popular newspaper said it would personally reserve sun loungers for Britons on holiday using its own towels. 

Bild was one of many newspapers across Europe who have pleaded with Britain to stay in the EU after dedicating their front pages to the referendum.  

German tabloid Bild has offered 11 hilarious bribes in a bid to urge Britain to reject Brexit - even vowing to finally recognise Geoff Hurst's disputed goal in the 1966 World Cup final

Gesture: Hurst's extra-time strike (pictured) at Wembley which put England 3-2 ahead of the then West Germany has long been a bone of contention between the two countries

The German daily dipped into decades of clichés about British-German relations for its front page - and referenced the controversy over the 1966 World Cup final.

Hurst's extra-time strike at Wembley which put England 3-2 ahead of the then West Germany has long been a bone of contention between the two countries. 

Germans claim it landed on the line after hitting the crossbar, while England fans insist the ball crossed the line before bouncing out of the goal.

For the tabloid Bild to be prepared to accept it as a valid goal is a mark of the concern many in Germany feel about the prospect of losing the UK from an EU, which they fear could become skewed towards Mediterranean states in its absence.

But recognising Hurst's goal from the famous 4-2 victory is not the only concession Bild is ready to make.  

In a front page addressed to 'Dear Brits', the paper also offers that if the UK votes Remain, they will stop making jokes about Prince Charles's ears.

We'll acknowledge the Wembley goal

We'll stop making jokes about Prince Charles's ears

We'll stop using sun cream on the beach out of solidarity with your sunburn

We'll reserve a place with our towels for you on the hotel sun-lounger

We'll introduce tea breaks

We'll turn our clocks back an hour to be in synch with you

We'll do without a goalie in penalty shoot-outs with you to make it a bit more exciting

We'll send (German national football manager) Joachim Low to guard your Crown Jewels

We'll introduce an EU regulation banning a frothy head on beer

We'll all come along to the Queen's 100th birthday

We'll willingly provide the villain in every Bond film 

Playing on the rivalry the two countries have long had on the football pitch, Bild also offered to go without a goalkeeper in future penalty shoot-outs 'to make it a bit more exciting'.

Germany defeated England in a penalty shootout in the semi-finals of the 1990 World Cup and the semi-finals of the 1996 Euros. 

The newspaper also pledged to introduce tea breaks, and to 'stop using sun cream on the beach out of solidarity with your sunburn'.

In a front page addressed to 'Dear Brits', the paper also offers that if the UK votes Remain, they will stop making jokes about Prince Charle's ears

Royal approval: In a final goodwill gesture, the newspaper then promised to attend the Queen's 100th birthday

In another football-based promise, Bild vowed to send its national team coach Joachim Low to 'guard your Crown Jewels'.

If Britain were to stay in the EU, Bild also pledged to supply the baddie for every James Bond film, put its clocks back one hour so they were on the same time zone as Britain and introduce an EU guideline that bans froth on beer. 

In a final goodwill gesture, the newspaper then promised to attend the Queen's 100th birthday.

Inside the paper, Bild revealed it had put a £10,000 bet on Remain winning the referendum and said it will spend the winnings on investing in 'German-British friendship' by shouting the drinks at a London pub. 

French newspapers Liberation (left) and La Croix (right) both dedicated their front pages to Britain's EU referendum

The Danish newspaper Politiken (left) and the Polish newspaper Fakt (right) also featured the Brexit vote on their front pages

On Monday, Sweden's Dagens Industri (left) printed 'Take a chance on EU!' along with the colours of the Union Jack. German paper Die Tageszeitung (right) showed the colours of the British flag on a toilet seat

Belgian newspaper Le Soir printed a picture of Leave campaigners outside the Houses of Parliament

Elsewhere, Germany's Spiegel said Brexit would be a 'triumph of cynicism over reason', adding 'were the British to leave the EU, it would be a threefold catastrophe: bad for Germany, bad for Britain and cataclysmic for Europe'.

Dutch newspaper AD urged Britons to vote for Remain, saying the European Union without the UK would be like 'tea without milk'. 

The Brexit vote also featured on the front pages of the French newspapers Liberation and La Croix as well as the Danish paper Politiken and Poland's Fakt. 

Meanwhile, the Irish Independent said the UK can 'legitimately gripe about its view not being treated with due respect by Brussels' but insisted the country is better off in, and asked 'voters in Britain, whether they are Irish or not, to vote to Remain'.

In China, the Global Times, published by the ruling Communist Party's official People's Daily, warned Britain would lose its influence globally if voters backed Brexit.



 

