Defiant Corbyn refuses to resign and claims he wants to be Prime Minister despite having a vote of no confidence tabled against him by his own MPs 

2016-6-24

Jeremy Corbyn has brushed aside calls to quit tonight defiantly saying: 'I will not resign'.

Furious Labour MPs said Mr Corbyn 'had to take his share of responsibility' for the referendum result, which saw huge numbers of voters in traditional Labour heartlands back Brexit.

Party grandee Dame Margaret Hodge and backbencher Ann Coffey today tabled a formal motion of no confidence in Mr Corbyn, saying it was time for him to go.

But the Labour leader insisted he was the right man to lead the party, telling Channel Four News: 'Of course I want to lead this party in order to put forward an alternative and lead this party to win the election as soon as it comes'. 





Jeremy Corbyn (pictured walking back to his office holding notes after attending a shadow cabinet meeting today) could be ousted as Labour leader within days 

The Labour leader insisted was not resigning despite a motion of no confidence being tabled by MPs

He said: 'I'm carrying on. I'm making the case for unity, I'm making the case of what Labour can offer to Britain, of decent housing for people, of good secure jobs for people, of trade with Europe and of course with other parts of the world. 

'Because if we don't get the trade issue right we've got a real problem in this country.' 

He added: 'What the British people need now is stability. Stability to retain their jobs, stability to protect those working conditions, and we need a plan from this government now on how they're going to approach the negotiations for leaving the European Union before they invoke Article 50.'

When asked about the vote of no confidence, he said: 'Margaret is obviously entitled to do what she wishes to do. I would ask her to think for a moment, a Tory prime minister resigned, Britain's voted to leave the European Union, there are massive political issues to be addressed.

'Is it really a good idea to start a big debate in the Labour Party when I was elected less than a year ago with a very large mandate not from MPs, I fully concede and understand that, but from the party members as a whole.' 



Mr Corbyn, a lifelong Eurosceptic, only agreed to back the Remain camp after he was threatened with a shadow cabinet walkout last year. 

But he struggled to make a convincing case to Labour voters, admitting he was 'no lover of the EU'.  









Calls for Mr Corbyn to follow the Prime Minister and fall on his sword have grown louder after as many as half of Labour voters abandoned the political mainstream to support the Leave campaign.  

Dame Margaret Hodge, pictured attacking Mr Corbyn on Sky News earlier today, has tabled a motion of no confidence in the Labour leader

MPs will vote on the motion next week in a secret ballot. 

Mr Corbyn has never had significant support among Labour MPs and would be likely to lose a secret vote.

The Labour leader has faced repeated accusations he ran a limp, half-hearted campaign for Remain hampered by his long-held Euroscepticism. 

Dame Margaret today told Sky News: 'I have thought about this overnight, I reflected really deeply.

'I think this is for the sake of the nation and the party in the context of a secret ballot, I think there will be overwhelming support.

'Labour needs to be able to lead the nation through a period of tumultuous change.' 

An anonymous Labour MP put it more bluntly, telling the Evening Standard: 'He is toast. If we got into a general election with him as leader, we will be wiped out. The Shadow Cabinet has got to tell him to go.'  

Parliamentary Labour Party chairman John Cryer will be asked to accept the motion on Monday night. If he does so, the secret ballot of confidence in Mr Corbyn would be held on Tuesday.

While not binding a defeat - which appears inevitable - would be devastating to what little authority Mr Corbyn wields over his MPs.  

Jeremy Corbyn, pictured today leaving home, was deserted by thousands of Labour supporters but the party still tried to claim today he was best placed to speak for a divided Britain

Mr Corbyn faced repeated claims he had run a lacklustre campaign. On the final day he appeared with (from left) Welsh first minister Carwyn Jones, Scottish Labour leader Kezia Dugdale, and London Mayor Sadiq Khan 



The Labour leadership sent out a script to Labour MPs which contained an eight-point plan on how to defend Jeremy Corbyn's performance during the referendum

A leaked memo was sent to Labour MPs with scripted lines to take boasting about how well Jeremy Corbyn had performed during the botched EU referendum campaign. 

In a detailed document for Labour spokespeople going on air to use - obtained by MailOnline - the party claims leadership claims the result is a 'damning indictment' of the Government and defend the desertion of Labour voters as a protest against the Tories.

Remarkably, the script gave eight bullet points under the heading: 'What's Jeremy done in this campaign'. 

It says he has attended 10 EU rallies, met with nurses in Birmingham, a clean beaches event in Truro, launched the Labour In bus and the Ad Van, taken part in a debate on Sky News, written two op-eds, reached more than 10 million people on social media, made six statements to the House of Commons on the EU, dedicated 10 PMQs on Europe and has been 'consistent on this issue from day one of his leadership'. 

The lengthy document - nearly 2,000 words long - signals the degree of panic at the heart of the Labour leadership over Mr Corbyn's future. 

He was repeatedly blamed throughout the campaign for failing to send a clear enough message on Labour's stance on the referendum and many in the party are blaming him for the crushing Brexit defeat. 

It has fuelled speculation that Mr Corbyn privately did not fully support staying in the EU. 

The lifelong Eurosceptic voted No in the 1975 referendum on whether Britain should stay in the Common Market and admitted as recently as Monday that he was 'not a lover' of the EU and said Brussels must change 'dramatically'. 

And he also admitted during the campaign that his passion for staying in the EU only rates at 'seven or seven and a half' out of ten. 



Former Prime Minister Tony Blair led attacks on Mr Corbyn's campaign in the aftermath of the declaration. 

He said Mr Corbyn had been 'pretty lukewarm' about staying in the EU.

He said Labour faced massive questions about its future, adding: 'I think what we will learn in the days, weeks, months ahead, I'm afraid, you can ride the anger through these populist movements but you don't actually produce the answers to the challenges people face.'

Asked if Mr Corbyn should quit, Mr Blair said: 'I think there are much, much bigger questions for the Labour Party right now.

'We've got to consider what our purpose is, where we are going and what we are trying to do here.'

His former spin chief Alastair Campbell said: 'I don't think there is anyone who can seriously think that Jeremy Corbyn connected with these voters that we lost.' 



Former Cabinet minister Ben Bradshaw called for him to quit, saying: 'This was a devastating and catastrophic defeat, not just for the Labour party but for our Labour leadership. I think Jeremy is a decent and nice man but his leadership, or rather lack of it, particularly during the referendum campaign, has been abysmal. 

'And I do think that, like David Cameron, he needs to shoulder his share of the responsibility and for the sake of the party and the country, step down.' 

Pro-EU MP Simon Danczuk, who had his Labour whip suspended last year, said there is 'no doubt' that Mr Corbyn must go.

Mr Corbyn today answered 'No' when asked if he would resign.

Mr Danczuk told Sky News: 'We've failed to get the message across to what you might describe as Labour heartlands.

'The truth is that Jeremy Corbyn just doesn't communicate well with those core voters. And the important point from that is that I think they're actually making that final disconnect with Labour.

'They weren't happy under Ed Miliband's leadership but they put up with it. They're not happy with Jeremy Corbyn's leadership.

'Their final act of disconnection is that they've gone and voted to take us out of Europe and that's what we're seeing this morning in these results.'

Asked if it means a change of leadership, he said: 'There's no doubt about it. You can't carry on, if you can't communicate with your core voters then you're not going to win general elections.' 





Brexit-backing Labour MP John Mann was scathing in his response, saying working class voters are 'sick to death' with what they are being offered.

He told BBC News: 'Labour has gone wrong by not being in touch with its voters, I've been saying this for the last 10 years in relation to immigration and free movement of labour, I've been saying it in relation to what the offer is to working class people - it's not something new in this campaign, I'm not the only one, but it's a small number who have been saying it at the national level in Labour.

'I've said it for the last 10 years repeatedly and what we're offering working class people, what the country's offering, is zero hours contracts, agency work, insecurity, and people are sick to death of it, they've had enough.

'And that's why in my area and elsewhere Labour voters have voted in huge numbers to leave the European Union.'

Simon Danczuk, pictured today at the national referendum count in Manchester, was the among the first Labour voices to call for Mr Corbyn to resign over the referendum result 

Until the Lisbon Treaty was signed, the EU had no formal legal process for members to leave.

But when member states were negotiating the 2007 agreement – which came into force two years later – they inserted Article 50.

This spells out the process by which governments can give the EU notice of their intention to leave the bloc.

Activating Article 50 fires the starting gun on a two-year negotiation, after which the member state automatically ceases to be in the EU.

Any new deal on membership terms must be signed off by a two-thirds majority of the European Council and be approved by the European Parliament.

The deadline can only be extended by a unanimous vote of the Council members.

Shadow minister Jon Ashworth said Labour must 'get out of London' and understand why Northern towns have voted to leave the European Union.

He told Sky News said: 'We have to understand why people voted the way they did. I've been arguing that we in the Labour Party, all the way down from the shadow cabinet, we'll be having our shadow cabinet meeting tomorrow, I'll be saying one of things we've got to do is get out of London and go to Sunderland, to Middlesbrough, to Wigan, and find out why people voted the way they did.'

Former Cabinet minister Yvette Cooper said Labour must address concerns in industrial towns and former coalfield communities.

Ms Cooper told ITV News: 'I think it does show really the pattern of a divided country and that is going to be a challenge for us whatever the result is, a real task to pull the country back together again.

'We have got particularly division between the cities and the towns, we knew that the Tory shires were more likely to be voting to Leave, the cities more likely to be voting Remain, we've also known for some time that industrial towns and coalfield communities were more likely to be voting to Leave as well.

'I think recognising the divisions and the genuine concerns of people who are voting out because they are in envy about the lack of economic opportunities, feeling worried about immigration, those sorts of concerns, that I think the Government has not listened to and not responded to and all parties need to respond to as well.' 

Labour MP Graham Jones said: 'I want a damn good explanation from Jeremy Corbyn as to why we ended up in this mess. If I am not satisfied, I will support the motion.' 

A key member of the Britain Stronger in Europe campaign told HuffPostUK: 'Jeremy hasn't pulled his weight. Even if we had won, it would have been despite not because of him.' 

Piers Corbyn, the Labour leader's brother, suggested Mr Corbyn retained his Eurosceptic views and could have backed Brexit in the privacy of the polling booth 

Mr Corbyn was dogged throughout the referendum campaign by claims he was failing to effectively make the case for staying in the EU.

Even his brother, Piers Corbyn, said the Labour leader could back Brexit in the privacy of the polling booth.

Nigel Farage today laid claim to the 'old Labour' vote, using a speech in Westminster to herald Ukip's success in winning over working class communities. 

Labour MPs who were already furious with Mr Corbyn will seize upon suggestions Mr Corbyn could capitalise on Brexit as further evidence the veteran left winger is deeply out of touch.  



Mr Corbyn himself today demanded Mr Cameron outline measures to stabilise the economy and invoke Article 50 of the EU Treaty - which begins Britain's departure - immediately in line with the nation's wishes before focusing on his own future.

 

