'Death to traitors, freedom for Britain': For a nation utterly sickened by the death of Jo Cox, a revolting new low as suspect utters chilling words in court

2016-6-18

It seemed impossible anything could cause more shock and outrage than the brutal killing of Labour MP Jo Cox… until the nine chilling words uttered in open court yesterday by the man accused of murdering her.

Asked to give his name, Thomas Mair stunned the courtroom by declaring: ‘My name is death to traitors, freedom for Britain.’

Deputy Chief Magistrate Emma Arbuthnot was so taken aback, she asked Mair to repeat his reply.

Thomas Mair, depicted centre, told Westminster Magistrates' Court yesterday: 'My name is death to traitors' 

Mair was charged with the murder of MP Jo Cox, pictured, who was shot and stabbed on Thursday afternoon

Mair was dressed in a grey sweatshirt and tracksuit bottoms during yesterday's 30-minute hearing 

Dressed in a grey sweatshirt and tracksuit trousers, stocky Mair, who also sported a small grey beard, repeated the same carefully rehearsed nine words, calmly and with no sign of emotion.

Asked a third time if that was the name he intended to give to the court, he replied: ‘Yes.’

During the rest of his 30-minute appearance in the glass-fronted dock of Court One at a preliminary hearing at Westminster Magistrates’ Court, Mair, 52, was silent.

By the time he was led away, flanked by black-shirted guards, the court had heard the first outline of his alleged crime.

As he shot defenceless Batley and Spen MP Mrs Cox, Mair shouted, ‘Keep Britain independent’ and ‘Britain First’.

When he was arrested he said he was a ‘political activist’, and police have found articles about Mrs Cox at his home, along with ‘extreme Right-wing and white supremacist’ material.

Mair was remanded in custody to reappear at the Old Bailey tomorrow for a bail application 

Mair’s court appearance came amid further dramatic political developments concerning the death of Mrs Cox, the activities of other far-Right extremists, and Thursday’s EU referendum:

Furthermore, this newspaper has uncovered fresh evidence of far-Right involvement in the referendum campaign – with appalling social media slurs against 41-year-old Mrs Cox.

A racist South African-inspired group linked to Mair has urged its supporters to campaign for a Leave vote on Thursday.

There were emotional scenes yesterday when Mrs Cox’s younger sister, Kim Leadbeater, paid tribute to the late MP as an ‘utterly amazing woman’.

She and her parents visited the scene of Mrs Cox’s death, while the MP’s grieving husband Brendan looked after their two young children.

Thomas Mair, pictured, is said to have suffered from mental health problems 

Family members are expected to be in the Commons public gallery tomorrow when Parliament is recalled so that MPs can pay tributes to Mrs Cox. A flower-laden memorial will be towed along the Thames from the houseboat where Mrs Cox lived to Westminster on Wednesday, which would have been her birthday. An online fundraising page launched after her death has already raised more than £500,000.

A three-day suspension in the EU referendum campaign ordered after the tragedy will be lifted today. However, both the Leave and Remain camps have vowed to tone down their aggressive rheto-ric following claims that it has contributed to a volatile public mood in the run-up to Thursday’s momentous vote.

Mair arrived in court yesterday – he appeared in London as a result of the high-profile nature of the case – just after 10am, flanked by two guards.

He was handcuffed to one of them but the restraints were removed after the court heard there had been no application to keep them on.

Friends and relatives of the murdered MP gathered in Birstall, West Yorkshire, for a brief commemoration 

Ms Cox's parents Jean and Gordon Leadbeater, pictured, held hands as they remembered their daughter

Kim Leadbeater, pictured reading from a sheet of paper, addressed the crowd in Birstall yesterday 

Jobbing gardener Mair, who is said to have suffered from mental health problems, appeared alert as he looked around the courtroom.

After declaring his name as ‘death to traitors, freedom for Britain’ he fell silent and did not answer when asked his address or date of birth. Instead, he stared straight ahead. He was also accused of committing grievous bodily harm against Bernard Kenny, the pensioner who tried to save Mrs Cox, and possession of a gun with intent to commit murder and possession of a knife.

Prosecuting barrister David Cawthorne then read out the full charges against Mair before giving the first full account of his alleged crimes, including their allegedly political motivation.

He revealed that married mother- of-two Mrs Cox had spent Thursday morning visiting a school and a care home in her West Yorkshire constituency before travelling to a planned surgery for local residents in Birstall library.

At about 12.45pm, the MP was spotted as she got out of her car by 77-year-old Mr Kenny, who was waiting for his wife while she visited the library.

‘Almost immediately he saw she was approached by an unknown male who began to attack her with a knife,’ the court was told.

Mr Kenny instinctively rushed to help but the knifeman stabbed him in the abdomen, forcing him to ‘retreat’ to a nearby sandwich shop. He remains in hospital.

Mair was remanded in custody to Belmarsh high security prison in south east London, pictured

Westminster Magistrates' Court heard the assailant was seen to stab Ms Cox, pictured, repeatedly 

The assailant was then seen to stab Mrs Cox ‘repeatedly’ and when she fell to the ground he was said to have taken a firearm from a black holdall and shot her three times. He then continued to stab her as she lay fighting for her life, the court heard.

Mr Cawthorne said: ‘Whilst doing that the defendant was heard to say words to the effect of “Britain first, keep Britain independent, Britain always comes first, this is for Britain”.’ Mair was said to have left the scene ‘calmly’ while Mrs Cox was rushed to hospital.

She she was pronounced dead at 1.48pm. A post-mortem examination found the cause of death was multiple stab and gunshot wounds.

Two policemen spotted Mair walking through Birstall carrying a black holdall and wearing a black baseball cap. They ordered him to drop the bag, and he stood in the road with his hands out and said: ‘It’s me.’

The officers rugby-tackled him to the floor to handcuff him, and while they were searching him he allegedly stated: ‘I’m a political activist.’

In his trouser pockets, it is alleged, they found a plastic bag full of .22mm bullets, while in the black bag they found a single-barrelled modified rifle with the safety cap off, one round in the chamber and two more in the magazine.

There was also a blood-stained mobile phone, a black baseball cap with the logo ‘Cuvana rum flavoured beer’, a blood-stained ‘dagger knife’ and a black wallet containing Mair’s photo ID, the court was told.

After Mair was arrested and armed police secured the area, his home in Birstall was searched.

According to the case summary provided to the court by the Crown Prosecution Service’s counter-terror division: ‘Initial searches have recovered newspaper articles relating to Jo Cox and ideological material relating to extreme Right-wing and white supremacist organisations / individuals.’ The court was told that Mair had applied for legal aid and will appear before the Old Bailey tomorrow for a bail application, and that a later hearing in his case could be heard along with terrorism cases.

In the meantime he is being held at Belmarsh top-security jail in South-East London.

Ms Arbuthnot observed that Mair’s mental health should be assessed in the light of his courtroom outburst. ‘Bearing in mind the name he has just given, he ought to be seen by a psychiatrist,’ she said.

 

