Spain demands shared sovereignty over GIBRALTAR, where 95.9% voted to remain in the EU

2016-6-24

Spain has demanded shared sovereignty over Gibraltar where more than 95 per cent voted to remain in the EU.   



The British Overseas Territory, at the entrance to the Mediterranean, relies heavily on its open border with Spain for trade.

But acting Spanish foreign minister Jose Manuel Garcia-Margallo said he hoped 'co-sovereignty' of Gibraltar and 'the Spanish flag on the Rock' were much closer to happening in the wake of the vote.

Spain has demanded shared sovereignty over Gibraltar (pictured) where more than 95 per cent voted to remain in the EU

Acting Spanish foreign minister Jose Manuel Garcia-Margallo (pictured) said he hoped 'co-sovereignty' of Gibraltar and 'the Spanish flag on the Rock' were much closer to happening in the wake of the vote

'We have been working hard on Brexit scenarios', said the Foreign Secretary, explaining that 'the instant the treaties stop applying, Gibraltar becomes a third country'.

That would lead to discussions on co-sovereignty, he said, which would be bilateral with the UK, not involving the European Union.

Gibraltar's chief minister Fabian Picardo, who shared a platform with Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond in May in support of the Remain campaign, had earlier tweeted: 'We have surpassed greater challenges. It is time for unity, for calm and for rational thinking. Together and united we will continue to prosper.'

Julie Girling, the South West England and Gibraltar Conservative MEP - who also backed Remain, said; 'I am deeply sorry that the people of the UK have chosen this leap in the dark. I believe future generations will question our wisdom.

'The EU has many faults, of course, but I remain convinced that we would be safer, stronger and better off by remaining a member.'

Worry and sadness have overwhelmed the minds and the hearts of Gibraltarians in the wake of the uncertainty produced on Gibraltar's future by the result of the EU referendum.

There is a common factor in their reactions: the management of the flow of people crossing the border to enter into Gibraltar from the Spanish side everyday, mainly commuters and tourists, as well as the general political stance of Spain regarding Gibraltar after the Spanish general elections next Sunday.

Vijay Vatvani, a Gibraltarian businessman, said: 'It's a little bit disappointing for Gibraltar since most of us wanted to remain within Europe because is better for us, it's safer, it means an easier passage into Spain, specially, and now we don't know what documents may be required to cross the border. 



Gibraltar's chief minister Fabian Picardo (pictured) had earlier tweeted: 'We have surpassed greater challenges. It is time for unity, for calm and for rational thinking'

'We're still in Europe, obviously, but we don't know how much human rights since we aren't in the EC are going to be respected there.

'I don't feel angry, I understand the British position totally, I understand a lot of money have been put into the system which a lot of English residents in England didn't agree with, so I understand their position but from my point as Gibraltarian I'm very disappointed.'  

Shopowner Joseph Bautista added: 'For Gibraltar is a difficult situation; we thought that Britain would remain in Europe but unfortunately it has not happened.

'Spain can creates problems to Gibraltar's future. We legally will be in Europe but the situation will change to the worst.

'I'm concerned, I'm sure everybody in Gibraltar is the same. We have to wait and see haw things develop.

Even if Britain tries very hard to protect Gibraltar there are certain circumstances which make it more difficult because now, we are out of Europe, we don't know what's going to happen.'

Gibraltar was ceded to Britain in 1713 in the Treaty of Utrecht. But over past decades Spain has made various noises about taking it back, including a 2013 dispute which saw border checks reintroduced - causing long delays - in a row over an artificial reef.

A referendum on joint sovereignty in 2002 saw 98.48 per cent of citizens of the territory back remaining British.

The Gibraltar Chamber of Commerce had also backed the Remain campaign, calling Brexit 'a leap in the dark'.

In a letter to members on Tuesday, the chamber's board said the open border with Spain had helped the territory's financial services industry develop.

It added: 'Each weekday half of Gibraltar's workforce crosses the border to get to work. Of the 12,000 people who cross the frontier, around 7,000 are Spanish and the remaining 5,000 are other Europeans. Without this open frontier many businesses in Gibraltar would not have a workforce.'

In May Mr Picardo told a news conference that Brexit supporters should reflect on the fact that a leave vote would see joint sovereignty 'back on the table'.

He said: 'Ironically, somebody who believes they are being patriotic and supporting Gibraltar by voting to leave the European Union will be bringing about, actually, Gibraltar having to face, once again, the prospect of joint sovereignty with Spain, something which most of the friends of Gibraltar in the Brexit side of the argument fought tooth and nail against at the time it was last tabled by a Labour government in the early part of the 21st century.' 



