A divided nation with two days to go: As one poll shows Brexit two points ahead but another gives Remain the advantage, data reveals the deep splits between young and old, the north and the south

2016-6-21

Britain is split down the middle with just two days of the referendum battle to go.

As voters prepare to go to the polls on Thursday to decide the future of the nation, YouGov data revealed deep splits across the nation.

While London and Scotland break strongly for Remain, Wales, the Midland and the North look set on a Leave vote.

Voters aged over 50 are leading the charge for Brexit but those aged 18 to 24 are set to heavily back the campaign to keep Britain inside the EU.

The two rival campaigns are engaged in a frantic final round of media appearances today before the last big TV clash tonight in a massive debate at Wembley Arena.

Data gathered by YouGov for The Times revealed deep splits within Britain on the EU referendum question as different sectors of the population appear set to vote in different ways on Thursday 

The YouGov survey, for The Times, found Leave was slightly ahead at this late stage of the race scoring 44 per cent to Remain's 42 per cent.

And a Survation poll also showed support for staying in the EU shrinking, with the Remain campaign ahead of Leave by a margin of just one per cent. 

But an ORB poll for the Telegraph - focused only on those who say they will definitely turn out on Thursday - found Remain ahead by 6 per cent, scoring 53 per cent to 46 per cent. 

The final days of the referendum battle look set to be dominated again by the twin themes of the economy and immigration. 

Steve Hilton, the former closest aide to David Cameron, made the extraordinary claim civil servants told the Prime Minister as long as as 2012 it would be impossible to meet the Tory target of getting net immigration down to the tens of thousands.

Mr Cameron hit back today, telling ITV's Lorraine in a live interview the claim was 'simply not right' and repeating his warning that there was no simple way to cut migration - and certainly not endorsing Brexit.

Billionaire George Soros warned a Brexit vote on Thursday could produce a 'Black Friday' as markets react in horror to instability caused by the result

He famously bet against the pound and won in the 1992 crash, forcing then prime minister John Major to pull Britain out of the 'European Exchange Rate Mechanism' in 1992, sparking chaos in the markets on a day that went down in history as 'Black Wednesday'.

Mr Soros today claimed the collapse in the value of the pound on Friday could be even bigger if Britain votes for Brexit and he warned it would leave people poorer.

With just two days until polls open, different polling companies produced different results in their latest snapshot of public opinion on the referendum 

Currency and stock markets have been on a roller-coaster ride during the referendum campaigning, plunging over the past fortnight as a succession of polls showed a Brexit lead.

But as market hopes of a Remain vote were raised yesterday, the FTSE100 index soared and the pound had one of its strongest days since the 2008 financial crisis.

Leading Leave campaigner Boris Johnson played down the significance of Mr Soros's intervention, telling LBC radio: 'The people I listen to are not people like George Soros, who speculate on market movements - that's how he makes his money.

'I listen to people like Anthony Bamford of JCB, the biggest private manufacturer in this country.'

Boris Johnson, pictured leaving home today, is due to take part in the final TV debate of the campaign at Wembley Arena tonight and this morning rejecting warnings of a 'Black Friday' if Britain backs Brexit 

Conservative peer and major Tory donor Lord Bamford wrote to his employees earlier this month urging them to vote Leave.

Elsewhere, David Beckham endorsed the Remain campaign today, telling voters to support staying in the EU 'for our children'.

The England footballing hero said Britain should be facing the challenges of the world together with its allies.

Beckham recalled how he and other British-born players at Manchester United were good enough to be successful alone but were a 'better and more successful team' because of European additions such as Eric Cantona, Roy Keane and Peter Schmeichel.

The ex-England captain said Britain was part of a 'vibrant and connected world' - but added the country would remain 'great' whatever the result on Thursday. 

David Cameron rebutted the latest Leave campaign claims about immigration today in an appearance on ITV's Lorraine, insisting it was 'not right' to say civil servants told him in 2012 it was impossible to get net immigration down to the tens of thousands while inside the EU 









