French minister's 'Guernsey' taunt: Politician warns Britain's standing will be the same as Channel Island's if country votes for Brexit 

2016-6-18

A leading French politician has warned that the UK will become as significant as the island of Guernsey if Britons backed Brexit.

Finance Minister Emmanuel Macron, who has been tipped as a possible future French president, said the UK’s world standing as a trading nation would plummet if it walked out of the European Union after Thursday’s referendum.

The Minister also said the EU would have to send ‘a very firm message and timetable’ in the event of a Leave vote, saying: ‘You’re either in or you’re out.’

French finance minister Emmanuel Macron, pictured, warned Britain would lose influence post Brexit

Macron claimed Britain after leaving the EU would be as relevant on the world stage as Guernsey, pictured

In an interview with the French newspaper Le Monde, Mr Macron said: ‘Leaving the EU would mean the ‘Guernsey-fication’ of the UK, which would then be a little country on the world scale. It would isolate itself and become a trading post and arbitration place at Europe’s border.’

His comments coincided with dire warnings about Brexit from other European politicians, including ex-Italian prime minister Mario Monti who said holding the referendum was ‘highly irresponsible’.

Mr Macron said if the UK wanted access to European single market benefits, it must contribute to the European budget just as Norway and Switzerland are required to do.

‘If London doesn’t want that, then it must be a total exit,’ he added.

The minister said that, whatever the outcome, the EU would have to work hard to avoid a possible knock-on effect among other countries tempted to leave.

But his prediction drew scorn from Leave campaigners. Former Defence Secretary Liam Fox said: ‘It is a bit classic to hear from a French finance minister, who is taking his economy back to the Middle Ages, that the most successful economy in Europe could be marginalised.’

 

