Brexiteers raise fears the Commons could MUTINY over quitting the EU single market as three quarters of them never wanted Out in the first place  

2016-6-24

MPs who campaigned for Remain were warned to respect the will of the people last night amid fears they could try to frustrate the Brexit result.

Some on the In side have called for sympathetic members on all benches – Tory, Labour, Lib Dem and SNP – to use their overwhelming majority in the Commons to keep Britain in the single market.

They want to sign the UK up to a Norway-style relationship with the EU that would bring full access to the single market on the same terms as now, but would result in Britain having to accept continued freedom of movement.

Former Tory MP Matthew Parris today the single market had not been on the ballot paper, stoking concern among Brexiteers the Commons could refuse to pass the necessary laws.  

Some on the In side have called for sympathetic members on all benches – Tory, Labour, Lib Dem and SNP – to use their overwhelming majority in the Commons to keep Britain in the single market

Out campaigners have warned that such a move would spark a constitutional crisis because it would counter the spirit of a pro-Brexit referendum result and ignore public concerns over EU immigration.

Some legal experts point out that the referendum is not legally binding – meaning MPs could in theory ignore it, no matter how politically difficult. The closeness of the result – 52 per cent in favour of Leave – could also give some MPs the excuse to call for not complying with the result.

But last night Bernard Jenkin, the Tory pro-Leave MP, said the referendum was clear-cut.

‘No one has a mandate from the voters to keep us in the single market, and the same applies to free movement,’ he said. 

‘Michael Gove could not have been more explicit that leaving the EU means leaving the single market. The EU is the single market, and the single market is the EU.’

In his regular Times column, Mr Parris said: 'Thursday’s result was not a vote to leave the single market: this was never on the ballot paper.

'Except with a Ukip-Tory alliance, any foreseeable Commons would block a (forgive me) smexit. Britain can instead leave and seek a status such as Norway’s — with free movement of labour.'

MPs on the Remain side said voting in favour of the single market – dubbed guerrilla tactics by one source – would be justified because they claim the Leave side has not set out the nature of Britain’s trading relationship with the EU after departure.

The Commons is overwhelmingly pro-EU, with just over 70 per cent of members having campaigned for Remain.

A slight majority of Tory MPs were pro-Remain, along with almost all Labour, SNP and Lib Dem MPs.

Out campaigners have warned that such a move would spark a constitutional crisis because it would counter the spirit of a pro-Brexit referendum result and ignore public concerns over EU immigration

Leaving the EU will require an act of parliament, but the Tory majority is only 12 – meaning that even if the Government tabled a bill to repeal EU membership, it would take only a few MPs to overturn the will of the people.

Earlier this month, one pro-European MP said: ‘We would have to respect the mandate of the referendum, but there is still plenty of scope on how and when we quit the EU.’

A source told the Guardian earlier this month that MPs may even seek to reverse a pro-Brexit decision altogether if the negotiations with the EU on the UK’s exit terms produce a disastrous deal.

Labour’s Stephen Kinnock told the BBC: ‘If the British people voted to leave the EU that’s one thing. But can we really say they voted for the devastation and destruction of the entire exporting sector of our economy?’

 

