Angela Merkel lashes out at 'exaggeration' in Brexit debate and warns without limits on rhetoric 'radicalisation will become unstoppable'

2016-6-17

Angela Merkel has waded into the row over linking Jo Cox's killing to the EU referendum, hitting out at 'exaggeration' during the campaign.

The German Chancellor warned it was 'important to draw limits' around the rhetoric people use in political debate or 'radicalisation will become unstoppable'.

Mrs Merkel, generally a close ally of Mr Cameron, has in the past revealed her frustration at the decision to hold a referendum in Britain and the rising risk of Brexit.

The German Chancellor warned it was 'important to draw limits' around the rhetoric people use in political debate or 'radicalisation will become unstoppable'

Asked about the Labour's MP's tragic death today, Mrs Merkel told journalists: 'The exaggerations and radicalisation of part of the language do not help to foster an atmosphere of respect.

'That's why we all value democratic game rules.

'And we know how important it is to draw limits, be it in the choice of speech, in the choice of the argument but also in the choice of partly disparaging argument.

'Otherwise the radicalisation will become unstoppable.'

Greece's member of the EU commission, Dimitris Avramopoulos, also claimed that Mrs Cox was killed 'for her dedication to European democracy'. 

In a Twitter message, he said: 'Jo Cox murdered for her dedication to European democracy and humanity.

'Extremism divides and nourishes hatred. Solidarity with her beloved.'

Senior Labour MP Rachel Reeves has warned against linking the death of Jo Cox to the bitter battle over the EU referendum.

Ms Reeves, a friend of Mrs Cox, dismissed the idea that the killing yesterday was a result of the way the campaign was being conducted.

Greece's member of the EU commission, Dimitris Avramopoulos, also claimed that Mrs Cox was killed 'for her dedication to European democracy'

The comments came after claims that the MP was targeted over her support for immigration and ties with Brussels.

Eyewitnesses said her attacker shouted 'Britain first' before shooting and stabbing her. 



But a family friend of the suspected attacker has denied he was 'politically motivated' or felt strongly about the referendum.

And Ms Reeves, who wept at a service remembering her fellow MP last night, said: 'There's of course going to be a lively debate around fundamental questions like our membership of the European Union.

'But, I don't think that's linked to what happened yesterday. I was at the vigil yesterday at Birstall parish church for Jo, where hundreds of her constituents came to pay tribute, not as a matter of courtesy but because they loved her, because she worked so hard for them. 

Labour's Rachel Reeves, pictured at the scene of the killing, has rejected suggestions that there was a link between the EU referendum campaign and the killing of Jo Cox yesterday



