'I don't think we should link the referendum to Jo's death': Friend and fellow Labour MP Rachel Reeves rejects claims bitter Brexit battle triggered deadly attack on Jo Cox

2016-6-17

A Labour MP has warned against linking the death of Jo Cox to the bitter battle over the EU referendum.

Rachel Reeves, a friend of Mrs Cox, dismissed the idea that the killing yesterday was a result of the way the campaign was being conducted.

The comments came after claims that the MP was targeted over her support for immigration and ties with Brussels.

Eyewitnesses said her attacker shouted 'Britain first' before shooting and stabbing her. 



Scroll down for video 

Labour's Rachel Reeves, left, has rejected suggestions that there was a link between the EU referendum campaign and the killing of Jo Cox, right, yesterday

Mrs Reeves breaks down in tears at the scene in Birstall market place this morning not far from where Ms Cox was murdered

But a family friend of the suspected attacker has denied he was 'politically motivated' or felt strongly about the referendum.

And Ms Reeves, who wept at a service remembering her fellow MP last night, said: 'There's of course going to be a lively debate around fundamental questions like our membership of the European Union. 

'But, I don't think that's linked to what happened yesterday. I was at the vigil yesterday at Birstall parish church for Jo, where hundreds of her constituents came to pay tribute, not as a matter of courtesy but because they loved her, because she worked so hard for them.

'And I think if we're honest most MPs every week are doing that work for their constituents, but a lot of that gets ignored and forgotten in the commentary and I think maybe it is a time to reassess what the role of an MP is. 

'Yes of course it's the debates about the big issues of our time, but also there is a role that MPs have serving their constituents.

'Often the last point of call is to go to an MP when they are desperate, whether that's on welfare, housing, anti-social behaviour or whatever. 

'We don't know what the motives were of the guy who attacked her yesterday. I don't think we should link the referendum to Jo's death.'

Ms Reeves also insisted the tragic episode should not stop MPs interacting with their constituents - although she has closed her office today as a mark of respect. 

'We mustn't let the actions of this man drive a wedge between MPs and the people who we were elected to serve,' she said. 

MPs and members of the public have been laying tributes outside of the Houses of Parliament

Campaiging for the EU referendum has been suspended as a mark of respect. The Conservatives have also announced they will not be contesting the by-election in Batley and Spen

'The work of an MP, our surgeries, our work in the community, must continue. But I think it's right today as well as ceasing the campaigning in the referendum that we close our office.

'I think, the fact that Jo died doing the job that she loved in the place that she loved in Birstall in Batley and Spen, is a reminder that the work of an MP isn't just in the Chamber of the House of Commons and in Westminster. 

'So much of the work that we do is in our community, serving local people, probably where we can make the most direct impact on people's lives. 

'A lot of people maybe don't see that work of an MP, but it's so important to me and obviously so important to Jo and all of us.

The Leeds West MP said the site where Mrs Cox was attacked was 'such a normal place'.

' The sort of street that is recognisable in any part,' she said.

Shadow education secretary Lucy Powell was among those paying their respects in Birstall today

The market square near the scene of the attack was stacked with tributes

'To think that such a horrific and violent crime took place against such a wonderful woman..there is a sense of numbness, not being able to believe what has happened

'And anger that someone could take away someone who had so much to give.

'Jo died doing the job she loved, in the place she loved, representing the people she loved.

'There is also grief and sorrow at the death of a mother, wife, daughter and a friend to many of us.'

The Conservative Party has announced that it will not contest the by-election in the Batley and Spen seat as a mark of respect to Mrs Cox. 

Iain Dale, the political commentator and ex-Tory Parliamentary candidate, agreed with Mrs Reeves, saying: ‘I’ve been appalled today listening to some blatant attempts by politicians, political figures, political commentators, who ought to know better, trying to politicise the events of the last 24 hours. Let’s deal with some facts, rather than politically motivated speculation shall we.

‘We have no idea whether there was political angle to this murder yesterday. What we do know is that the man who has been arrested has a history of mental health problems. That is a fact. It’s about the only fact that we do know. Now to attribute the hateful actions of one man to any political agenda at this stage speaks more about those who try to do this than they might like to admit.’

Floral tributes were also left on the houseboat on the Thames where Mrs Cox lived with her husband Brendan and two small children

Ex-Tory MP Louise Mensch said the tone of Miss Toynbee’s article was ‘vile’, adding: ‘Jo’s loss is something that all of us in the UK must feel and our politics is irrelevant.

‘Far, far too many on the Remain side of the referendum have, however, used Cox’s tragic death for political point scoring.’

She added: ‘[The attacker] was severely mentally ill and had been treated over a long period of time.

‘It is beyond disgusting, then, to use this man’s mental collapse and psychological unsoundness as a weapon in a political campaign. Let the doctors weigh in before we ascribe any part of this to ordinary politics.’

London Mayor Sadiq Khan said the whole country ‘just needs to pause and reflect’ and make sure the final days before the referendum are not marred by a ‘climate of hatred, of poison, of negativity, of cynicism’.

The man suspected of the killing, Thomas Mair, was 'not politically motivated', according to a friend of his mother.



Rosemary Surman, 61, said Mair, who is being questioned by police, had no strong feelings on our membership of the EU.



Said she had known the gardener for a 'long, long time'. 'We've been talking to him and asking him about whether we should be in or out of the EU and he always said there were good arguments for both sides,' she said.

'He had never mentioned Jo Cox before ever, I don't think he even knew who she was.

'He was even going to go down to vote with us, to take us down there.'

Ms Surman said Mair had not been able to 'stand the sight of blood', even his own. 



'You never know, anybody can just snap,' she added. 





David Cameron, centre, joined Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, right, in laying flowers in Birstall today. Shadow foreign secretary Hilary Benn, left, Speaker John Bercow and Commons chaplain Rose Hudson-Wilkin were also there 

German Chancellor Angela Merkel

Angela Merkel has waded into the row over linking Jo Cox's killing to the EU referendum, hitting out at 'exaggeration' during the campaign.

Asked about the Labour's MP's tragic death today, Mrs Merkel told journalists: 'The exaggerations and radicalisation of part of the language do not help to foster an atmosphere of respect.

'That’s why we all value democratic game rules. And we know how important it is to draw limits, be it in the choice of speech, in the choice of the argument but also in the choice of partly disparaging argument.

'Otherwise the radicalisation will become unstoppable.' 

Greece's member of the EU commission, Dimitris Avramopoulos, also claimed that Mrs Cox was killed 'for her dedication to European democracy'.

Polly Toynbee, the Guardian

‘There are many decent people involved in the campaign to secure Britain’s withdrawal from the EU, many who respect the referendum as the exercise in democracy that it is. But there are others whose recklessness has been open and shocking. I believe they bear responsibility, not for the attack itself, but for the current mood: for the inflammatory language, for the finger-jabbing, the dog-whistling and the overt racism.’

Jonathan Freedland, the Guardian

‘We don’t yet know what was in the mind of the man who killed Jo Cox. Latest reports suggest the suspect in the case had links to a neo-Nazi, white supremacist group in the US. But even if we cannot locate a specific cause in the nation’s political debate and claim this murder as its direct effect, we can say this: that if you inject enough poison into the political bloodstream, eventually somebody will get sick.’

Labour MP Neil Coyle

‘I think that the kind of nonsense that they inspire online from anonymous accounts and actually the core content of the poster (Ukip) launched today, look at what they are putting out and I just think that they are a very dangerous, and they risk inspiring extremist elements in the hard Right in this country.’

Alex Massie, on the Spectator website

‘When you encourage rage you cannot then feign surprise when people become enraged. You cannot turn around and say, “Mate, you weren’t supposed to take it so seriously. It’s just a game, just a ploy, a strategy for winning votes”.’

Angela Merkel, the German chancellor

‘The exaggerations and radicalisation of part of the language do not help to foster an atmosphere of respect. That’s why we all value democratic game rules. And we know how important it is to draw limits in the choice of speech and in the choice of argument. Otherwise the radicalisation will become unstoppable.’

Alain Juppé, French presidential candidate

‘Jo Cox, British MP, shamefully murdered because of her beliefs. Hatred is the poison of our democracies.’

Dimitris Avramopoulos, EU Commissioner for Migration

‘Jo Cox murdered for dedication to European democracy and humanity. Extremism divides and nourishes hatred.’





