Brexit vote hangs in the balance after Jo Cox murder: Polls divided after MP's killing leaves country undecided ahead of EU referendum

2016-6-19

The Brexit vote is in the balance with polls showing the country may still be undecided ahead of Thursday's EU referendum.

A Survation poll for The Mail On Sunday found Remain had opened up a three-point lead in the wake of the killing of the Labour MP Jo Cox.

But another survey revealed today shows the two sides are level while a third has voters saying they are more enthusiastic about leaving the EU than staying.

Ukip leader Nigel Farage today said the killing could have halted 'momentum' behind the Leave campaign.  

The Brexit vote is in the balance with polls showing the country may still be undecided ahead of Thursday's EU referendum. In One poll out today, by Opinium for the Observer, shows the race finely balanced at 44-44. A Survation poll for the Mail on Sunday shows Remain ahead 45-42 but a YouGov survey for Good Morning Britain shows Leave ahead 44 to 42. A fourth survey by BMG for Herald found Remain on 46 per cent to Leave on 43 per cent 

A Survation poll for The Mail On Sunday found Remain had opened up a three-point lead in the wake of the Killing of the Labour MP Jo Cox (pictured)

Campaigning was due to resume today after a suspension lasting more than two days following the fatal attack on Mrs Cox, a strong supporter of Britain staying in the EU.

The man charged with her murder, Thomas Mair, gave his name as 'death to traitors, freedom for Britain' when he appeared in court on Saturday. 

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn is due to take part in a major BBC interview to mark Mrs Cox's death and make the case for Remain.

The BBC's Andrew Marr will also interview Michael Gove as campaigning resumes with just four days to go, while Chancellor George Osborne and Ukip leader Nigel Farage are both due to be grilled by ITV's Robert Peston.

Prime Minister David Cameron will take part in a live BBC Question Time special tonight to make his case for staying in the UK.  





Survation's results changed dramatically in polls carried before and after Thursday's tragic events. On Thursday, the firm found Leave was ahead by 45-42 but another poll carried out yesterday showed the reverse. In both surveys 13 per cent of people were still undecided 

Ukip leader Nigel Farage today the 'momentum' behind the Leave campaign was halted when the referendum was halted by Mrs Cox's killing.

He told ITV's Peston on Sunday: I think we have momentum.

'We did have momentum until this terrible tragedy. It has had an impact on the whole campaign for everybody.

'When you are taking on the establishment, you need to have momentum. I don't know what's going to happen over the course of the next three to four days, but (this was) the action of one person with serious mental issues.

'What we saw was an act of terrorism.'

Today's Survation poll was gathered on Friday and Saturday as the nation mourned Mrs Cox and showed Remain on 45 per cent with Leave on 42 per cent.

And the gap could get bigger: 46 per cent say Remain are likely to benefit from any additional late surge, with 33 per cent forecasting a late swing to Leave.  

The findings reversed the result of Survation data on Thursday which had Leave ahead on 45 per cent and Remain on 42 per cent.

Ukip leader Nigel Farage today said the Leave campaign had momentum before Thursday's killing of Jo Cox but admitted the tragedy would have an unknown effect on all the campaigns 

Earlier, a clutch of polls conducted either partially or fully before campaigning was suspended following the death of Mrs Cox on Thursday, continued to present a mixed picture. 

Opinium for The Observer puts the two sides level on 44 per cent  - with Leave up two points on last week while Remain was unchanged.

A UK-wide BMG telephone survey for The Herald put Remain ahead on 46 per cent with Leave on 43 per cent, and 11 per cent undecided or unwilling to say.

By using a series of questions to calculate the likely voting intention of people who say that they will vote but have yet to decide or do not want to say, BMG put the Remain camp ahead on 53 per cent compared to 47 per cent.

Meanwhile a ComRes Poll for The Sunday People and The Independent suggests voters are more enthusiastic about leaving the EU than staying, with 44 per cent saying they would be 'delighted' with an Out vote compared to just 28 per cent who would feel that way about In.

According to the Sunday Mirror, attitudes towards the referendum shifted as news of the attack on Mrs Cox broke.

Pollsters for the newspaper were still gathering responses as news of the shooting emerged. Figures showed the Remain camp receive a nine point boost after 2pm on Thursday from people saying they would be 'delighted' if Britain stayed in the EU.

According to a Survation poll for the Mail On Sunday, the Remain vote has surged ahead of Brexit since Thursday's murder of Jo Cox in West Yorkshire

Andrew Hawkins, chairman of ComRes, told the Independent that the attack might have influenced responses.

He said: 'Not all respondents will have learned of the attack immediately, and the results should be taken with a degree of caution, but across all emotions reaction to a Leave vote was more negative among those interviewed after 2pm on Thursday.' 



Meanwhile, a YouGov poll for the Sunday Times newspaper showed support for Britain staying in the EU had restored a narrow 44-43 per cent lead over the 'Out' campaign. 

That poll was based on interviews conducted on Thursday and Friday, but the Sunday Times said the shift did not reflect the fatal attack on a British lawmaker on Thursday which led to the suspension of referendum campaigning.

Instead, the bounce in support for 'In' was more a reflection of growing concerns among voters about the economic impact of a so-called Brexit, it said.



- Survation interviewed 1,001 adults by telephone on June 17 and 18. 

- Opinium interviewed 2,006 UK adults online between June 14 and 17. 

- ComRes interviewed 2,046 GB adults online between June 15 and 16. 

- BMG interviewed 1,043 UK residents aged 18 and over by telephone between June 10 and 15.  

Campaigning was due to resume today after a suspension lasting more than two days following the fatal attack on Mrs Cox, a strong supporter of Britain staying in the EU

A clutch of polls conducted either partially or fully before campaigning was suspended following the death of Mrs Cox on Thursday, continued to present a mixed picture





