Remain campaign at war as Lord Sugar is condemned for 'utterly unacceptable' claim that Brexit campaigner 'shouldn't tell us British what we should do' because she's from Germany

2016-6-21

Infighting has broken out in the Remain campaign after pro-EU Apprentice boss Lord Sugar (pictured) said a Brexit campaigner should not 'tell us British what we should do' because she is from Germany

Infighting has broken out in the Remain campaign after pro-EU Apprentice boss Lord Sugar said a Brexit campaigner should not 'tell us British what we should do' because she is from Germany. 

He was attacking Labour MP Gisela Stuart, who is from Bavaria and moved to Britain in 1974 and was representing the Brexit camp in the last major TV debate before Thursday's referendum. 

James McGrory, the spokesman for the official Britain Stronger In Europe campaign, said his remarks were 'utterly unacceptable'. 

It was an extraordinary outbreak of infighting within the Remain campaign just hours before polls open in Britain's first referendum on EU membership in 41 years. 

Ms Stuart, now a British citizen, was representing the Leave campaign alongside Boris Johnson and Tory minister Andrea Leadsom in front of 6,000 people at a high-stakes debate Wembley Arena. 

Businessman and Remain backer Lord Sugar took exception at her appearance in the debate, tweeting: 'I find it strange that Gisela Gschaider a 1974 immigrant from Germany is on the Brexit panel telling us British what we should do.'

He added: 'She immigrated to UK from Germany in 1974. 30 mins ago was advocating that we stop immigration from the EU.' 



And after one of his Twitter followers branded him a 'racist', Lord Sugar replied: 'You ignorant fool. How can my comment be classified as racist. Crawl back under your rock'. 

Lord Sugar again insisted he was not being racist, pointing out that Ms Stuart is an immigrant who is now arguing against immigration.





Businessman and Remain backer Lord Sugar took exception at her appearance in the debate, tweeting: 'I find it strange that Gisela Gschaider a 1974 immigrant from Germany is on the Brexit panel telling us British what we should do.' He added: 'She immigrated to UK from Germany in 1974. 30 mins ago was advocating that we stop immigration from the EU.' And after one of his Twitter followers branded him a 'racist', Lord Sugar replied: 'You ignorant fool. How can my comment be classified as racist. Crawl back under your rock'

In a series of tweets, he said: 'Yes she is (British) now, and has been arguing that we need to curb immigrants from the EU. She immigrated to UK from Germany in 1974. 

Tory MP and Leave backer Nadhim Zahawi took exception to the remarks, saying: 'You must withdraw and apologise to Gisela. That is disgraceful. She is as British as you are.'

And former Tory MP Louise Mensch tweeted: '@Lord-Sugar PIG'. 

But it was the condemnation of the official Remain campaign that will do the most damage to Lord Sugar.

Mr McGrory tweeted: 'This is utterly unacceptable. I couldn't disagree with Gisela Stuart more but she has every right to say her piece.'

Tory MP and Leave backer Nadhim Zahawi took exception to the remarks, saying: 'You must withdraw and apologise to Gisela. That is disgraceful. She is as British as you are'

James McGrory, the spokesman for the official Britain Stronger In Europe campaign, said Lord Sugar's remarks were 'utterly unacceptable' 



The extraordinary row  came as six leading figures from the Remain and Vote Leave campaigns went head-to-head in a bruising, two-hour debate at Wembley Arena. 

In the final major showdown of the bitter campaign - coming less than 36 hours before polls open in the historic referendum, leading Brexit campaigner Boris Johnson urged voters to make the EU referendum Britain's 'Independence Day'. 

He was involved in brutal clashes with Sadiq Khan and fellow Tory Ruth Davidson in the crunch TV debate.

With less than 36 hours left until the polls open, Mr Johnson laid into the Remain side for 'talking the country down' by issuing a slew of dire Project Fear warnings about the consequences of cutting ties with Brussels. 

But newly-installed London Mayor Mr Khan hit back by accusing him of telling 'lie after lie' and running 'Project Hate', while Scottish Conservative leader Ms Davidson lashed out at him for trying to turn the programme into 'the Boris show'.

The exchanges came as the sides clashed in a BBC special at Wembley Arena likely to have been watched by millions.

Mr Johnson was joined by Tory Treasury minister Andrea Leadsom and Labour's Gisela Stuart for the programme in front of a 6,000 strong live audience.

Alongside Mr Khan were Scottish Conservative leader Ms Davidson and TUC Secretary General Frances O'Grady.

Boris Johnson hugs Ruth Davidson minutes after they mauled each other in bruising EU debate

Boris Johnson and Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson embraced just minutes after mauling each other in a bruising final EU debate last night.

The Tory pair repeatedly clashed in the two-hour debate at Wembley Arena, with pro-EU Ms Davidson interrupting Mr Johnson mid-sentence to tell viewers: 'It isn't the Boris show.

She accused his Brexit campaign of lying and echoed Tom Cruise as she told voters: 'You deserve the truth'. But getting his own back, Mr Johnson used a Scottish example to attack Ms Davidson's argument for staying in the EU.

He drew laughter from the 6,000-strong crowd as he told her: ‘Because the EU is in charge of our trade negotiations we cannot export haggis to America.’

Boris Johnson (right) hugs Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson (left) despite the pair repeatedly clashing during in the two-hour debate at Wembley Arena last night

But as soon as the cameras had stopped rolling, the two rivals - who have both been tipped as future Tory leaders - were seen smiling as they hugged each other on stage.

Ms Davidson, a keen kick-boxer who announced her engagement to partner Jennifer Wilson last month, also laid into her Tory colleague Andrea Leadsom, another Brexit panelist.

She took Ms Leadsom to task over Vote Leave's claim that 60 per cent of our laws originate from Brussels.

‘I think I need to pick up on something Andrea said because I can’t let it stand that you tell a blatant untruth in the middle of a debate two days before we vote,' she said in yet another example of a blue-on-blue attack.

‘She said 60 per cent of our laws are made in European and it’s simply not true. 13 per cent of our laws, according to the independent House of Commons library that number is 13 per cent. In the last five year parliament it was four – there were four bills out of 121 that came out of Europe.

Ms Davidson added: ‘I think there’s a real question here, that you’re being asked to make a decision that’s irreversibly, that we can’t change if we wake up on Friday and don’t like it, and we’re being sold it on a lie because they lied about the costs of Europe, they lied about Turkey’s entrance to Europe, they lied about the European army because we have a veto over that.

‘They put this on their leaflets and they’ve lied about this tonight too and it’s not good enough because you deserve the truth, you deserve the truth,’ she finished to loud applause and banging from the audience.’



Data gathered by YouGov for The Times revealed deep splits within Britain on the EU referendum question as different sectors of the population appear set to vote in different ways on Thursday 

Britain is split down the middle with just two days of the referendum battle to go.

As voters prepare to go to the polls on Thursday to decide the future of the nation, YouGov data revealed deep splits across the nation.

While London and Scotland break strongly for Remain, Wales, the Midland and the North look set on a Leave vote.

Voters aged over 50 are leading the charge for Brexit but those aged 18 to 24 are set to heavily back the campaign to keep Britain inside the EU.

The YouGov survey, for The Times, found Leave was slightly ahead at this late stage of the race scoring 44 per cent to Remain's 42 per cent.

And a Survation poll also showed support for staying in the EU shrinking, with the Remain campaign ahead of Leave by a margin of just one per cent.

But an ORB poll for the Telegraph - focused only on those who say they will definitely turn out on Thursday - found Remain ahead by 6 per cent, scoring 53 per cent to 46 per cent.

 

