Bond backs Remain! Daniel Craig joins Posh and Becks and a host of other sports stars urging voters to stay in the EU 'for our children'

2016-6-21

James Bond star Daniel Craig is the latest celebrity to declare his support for Britain staying in the EU. 

He was pictured last night wearing a white T-shirt with the slogan: 'No man is an island. No country by itself. Vote Remain on 23rd June.' 

The picture of the retiring James Bond in the pro-EU T-shirt was first published by Turner Prize-winning artist Wolfgang Tillmans, who told his Instagram followers that Craig had sent him the picture. 

Minutes after the picture appeared online David Cameron tweeted it along with the words: 'It's great to see Daniel Craig is planning to Vote Remain on Thursday.' 



It delivers another boost to the Remain campaign after the endorsements of David and Victoria Beckham urged voters to support staying in the EU 'for our children'.

James Bond star Daniel Craig (pictured left) revealed his support for Britain staying in the EU after posing in a T-shirt with the slogan: 'No man is an island. No country by itself. Vote Remain on 23rd June'. It came hours after David and Victoria Beckham (pictured right) declared their support for Britain staying in the EU

The England footballing hero and his fashion designer wife said Britain should be facing the challenges of the world together with its allies. 

He was joined by his former England colleague Rio Ferdinand, who compared EU membership to playing the success they achieved at Manchester United.  

'We had to work even harder, and be even more of a team, to get where we wanted to be,' he wrote in the Evening Standard today. 

In a day of sports celebrity endorsements nearly 50 stars - including  former England rugby captain Laurence Dallaglio and marathon champion Paula Radcliffe - wrote a letter arguing: 'We are stronger working together'.

The letter was also signed by sportsmen from all corners of the UK, with former Northern Ireland footballer Neil Lennon and ex-Welsh goalkeeper Neville Southall also among the signatories. 

David and Victoria Beckham endorsed the Remain campaign today, insisting Britain was part of a 'vibrant and connected world' 

The former footballer was seen out in London this afternoon after backing the Remain campaign ahead of Thursday's EU referendum

With polls showing Thursday's historic referendum is too close to call, the Remain campaign will hope the last-minute celebrity endorsements will push them over the line. 

But Crystal Palace chairman Steve Parish blasted the celebrity sporting endorsements as 'the politics of the playground' as he hit out at Premier League chief executive Richard Scudamore for claiming yesterday that all 20 clubs wanted Britain to stay in the EU.





Mr Parish, also co-owner of the south London club, said football clubs should not be telling anyone how to vote in an election and distanced his club from Mr Scudamore's statement.

'Unlike some of the things in the EU, the Premier League is a democracy and we get to vote for things. And we didn't vote for that,' he told the BBC today.

Beckham made his endorsement in a Facebook post this morning. 

He recalled how he and other British-born players at Manchester United were good enough to be successful alone but were a 'better and more successful team' because of European additions such as Eric Cantona, Roy Keane and Peter Schmeichel.

Ex-England defender Rio Ferdinand (left) also endorsed the Remain campaign today, comparing the EU to his success at Manchester United, while marathon champion Paula Radcliffe (right) was among nearly 50 sports stars who wrote a letter arguing for Britain to stay in the EU

Former Northern Ireland footballer Neil Lennon (left) was among the signatories backing the Remain campaign but Crystal Palace chairman and co-owner Steve Parish (right) dismissed the celebrity sporting endorsements as 'the politics of the playground'

The ex-England captain said Britain was part of a 'vibrant and connected world' - but added the country would remain 'great' whatever the result on Thursday.

His wife Victoria also spoke out after Vote Leave highlighted Eurosceptic comments she made in 1996 while she was in the Spice Girls.

At the time she said in an interview that  'Euro bureaucrats are destroying every bit of national identity and individuality'.

But in a statement on Facebook, Victoria said the remarks were about 'keeping or losing the Pound' not the referendum.

'I believe in my country, I believe in a future for my children where we are stronger together and I support the #remain campaign,' she wrote. 

Prime Minister David Cameron immediately welcomed the endorsement on Twitter today and will hope it is enough to push his Remain campaign over the line on Thursday

The letter signed by nearly 50 sports stars and sports industry figures states: 'In sport, the one thing that matters above all else is your team. Whether on the football pitch or running track, in the pool or in the gym, you can achieve so much more by working together. 

'And the same is true for Britain in Europe: we are stronger working together with other countries with the ability to travel, work and play sport right across the continent. 

'To remain a world leader in sport, we need to remain in the European Union. And that's why we'll be voting to remain on 23rd June.'  

'In sport, the one thing that matters above all else is your team. Whether on the football pitch or running track, in the pool or in the gym, you can achieve so much more by working together. 

'And the same is true for Britain in Europe: we are stronger working together with other countries with the ability to travel, work and play sport right across the continent. 

'To remain a world leader in sport, we need to remain in the European Union. And that's why we'll be voting to remain on 23rd June.'  

Prime Minister David Cameron welcomed the endorsements today, which could boost his hopes of winning on Thursday.  

Polls show the referendum going down to the wire and the Remain campaign will hope a late celebrity endorsement will help push them over the line. 

In his own endorsement of the Remain campaign, Ferdinand wrote: 'Sir Alex Ferguson always taught us that no individual is bigger than the team — that just because we played for Manchester United didn't mean we could swan around doing our own thing. 

'We had to work even harder, and be even more of a team, to get where we wanted to be. 

'I think Europe is a bit like that. Britain is an amazing country but we'll achieve much more if we're a team player – working with others to get things done. 

'I believe we need to work with our friends and neighbours in Europe if we want to make changes our children can be proud of. 

'The sort of things young people care about: tackling climate change, helping refugees, fighting disease in Africa — they can only get fixed if we all work together.' 

But sports people were not united today as Mr Parish slammed the Premier League's chief executive Richard Scudamore for claiming all clubs were in favour of staying in the EU. 

He told BBC Radio 5 Live today: 'We didn't have a vote. Every single position in the Premier League requires a vote. 

'Unlike some of the things in the EU, the Premier League is a democracy and we get to vote for things. 

'And we didn't vote for that. This club would like to distance itself from that statement. I don't think it is for Premier League clubs to decide how people vote.

'Unless I fell asleep in a meeting which I don't think I did, we didn't have a vote on whether we endorsed a view to stay in Europe.

'And for me, I don't think it is the position of a football club to tell anyone to vote in any election. It is extraordinary that David Cameron would tweet that as a fact and use our logo as if we are endorsing one view or another. We were never asked.

Polls show the referendum going down to the wire and the Remain campaign will hope a late celebrity endorsement will help push them over the line

'We have probably got a split inside our ownership group, we haven't debated it internally and we would certainly like our supporters to vote with their conscience and based on the facts that they know and not because the football club is encouraging them to do anything.' 





Yesterday, Britain Stronger in Europe released more material from the endorsement of ex-Top Gear hosts Jeremy Clarkson and James May.

In a statement today, Beckham said: 'I'm passionate about my country and whatever the result of Thursday's referendum, we will always be Great. 

'Each side has the right to their opinion and that should always be respected whatever the outcome of the European Referendum.

'I played my best years at my boyhood club, Manchester United. I grew up with a core group of young British players that included Ryan Giggs, Paul Scholes, Nicky Butt and the Neville Brothers.

'Added to that was an experienced group of older British players such as Gary Pallister, Steve Bruce and Paul Ince.

'Now that team might have gone on to win trophies but we were a better and more successful team because of a Danish goalkeeper, Peter Schmeichel, the leadership of an Irishman Roy Keane and the skill of a Frenchman in Eric Cantona.'

Beckham said he had been 'privileged' to play and live in Paris, Madrid and Milan during his career, together with team mates from around the world.

He added: 'Those great European cities and their passionate fans welcomed me and my family and gave us the opportunity to enjoy their unique and inspiring cultures and people.

Mr Cameron welcomed the Beckham intervention in an interview with ITV's Lorraine today, insisting Britain had to be part of the European team 

'We live in a vibrant and connected world where together as a people we are strong. For our children and their children we should be facing the problems of the world together and not alone.

'For these reasons I am voting to Remain.'

Mr Cameron today told ITV's Lorraine: 'There was a very moving statement today from David Beckham talking about his children and saying how effectively, what he said to me was, 'you can't win in Europe, unless you're on the pitch', and that's true.

'I worry about that as Prime Minister, I know that we sit around the table [with Europe] and make decisions about security and safety and fighting terrorism and all the rest of it, fighting climate change.

'And if we leave they don't stop meeting and making decisions that affect us, but they'll be making decisions about us but without us in the room and that would be bad for Britain.' 



Clarkson and May made a bizarre film urging voters to stay in the EU because leaving would make it much harder to film their motoring shows.

Standing in front of a map of Europe, they warn that European countries outside the EU, such as Switzerland, are a 'waste of time,' explaining to viewers that they don't film in the country because of custom duties.

Jeremy Clarkson (right) and James May (left) said they were 'fond' of Europe and staying in the EU was one of few issues they agree on - along with the views that the Ford Mondeo is a good car and 'sandwich spread is delicious'

The short YouTube video showed the pair, who are filming for their new Amazon show The Grand Tour, attempting to put on a united front despite being known for their argumentative relationship. 

Clarkson and May said they were 'fond' of Europe and staying in the EU was one of few issues they agree on - along with the views that the Ford Mondeo is a good car and 'sandwich spread is delicious'.   



'It's annoys me actually, I'll be honest, because I want to remain in Europe but that means agreeing with him,' Clarkson explains, motioning to his colleague. 

The Remain campaign has repeatedly trumpeted its support and endorsements from celebrities and other high profile names, coordinating letters and appearances.

By contrast, the Leave campaign has attracted less celebrity support - but does count England cricket legend Sir Ian Botham and actor Sir Michael Caine among its backers.

Vote Leave champion Michael Gove pointed out that the Brexit campaign had the support of another ex-England captain when he heard about Beckham's comments.

'Sol Campbell is for Leave, as indeed, I think, is John Barnes. As a QPR fan I know what it's like to support the underdog,' the Justice Secretary said in a BBC interview this morning.

Beckham has intervened on referenda before, endorsing a 'No' vote in the 2014 Scottish independence poll.  



