'I hate Tim Peake! 'Will bomb countries for votes!' Twitter mocks Tony Blair in typical style after former PM tweets placard declaring how he voted in EU referendum

2016-6-23

Tony Blair was relentlessly mocked after he tweeted a pictured of himself smiling and holding a placard that declared: 'I voted Remain' in the EU referendum yesterday.

The former Labour Prime Minister wrote: 'I believe voting to Remain will secure Britain’s place as a proud, influential country with a strong economy. TB.' 

Minutes later Twitter responded in typical style by publishing their own photoshopped signs of Blair and a placard with very different messages.

The former Labour Prime Minister wrote: 'I believe voting to Remain will secure Britain’s place as a proud, influential country with a strong economy. TB'

One user tweeted a picture of Blair with the slogan: 'Will Work for Cheese,' while another showed the divisive former PM holding up a sign advertise 'Anusol'.

Another wrote: 'Will bomb countries for votes,' another joked: 'I hate Tim Peake' while others said: 'I Rote This Sine On My Own'.

And one photo-shopped version suggested Blair was a big fan of radical left-winger Jeremy Corbyn, who continues to brand him a 'war criminal' over his decision to invade Iraq in 2003. 

Twitter was ablaze with EU referendum-related chatter yesterday, with Leave supporters urging fellow Brexiteers to use pens to vote rather than pencils because their cross could be rubbed out and changed, with some even claiming MI5 are involved. 

Many have used the hashtag 'usepens' to encourage others to refuse to use a pencil, although it has since been hijacked by Remain campaigners who are calling them conspiracy theorists. 

A poll released this week revealed that many Leave campaigners feared that the referendum was rigged against them.

Minutes later Twitter responded in typical style by publishing their own photoshopped signs of Blair and a placard with very different messages

One Twitter user photoshopped his placard to say: 'I Rote This Sine On My Own' while another showed the divisive former PM holding up a sign advertise 'Anusol'

The idea has been widely mocked, including by BBC star Professor Brian Cox who tweeted: 'I voted in pencil just in case MI5 need to change it later'.

The Electoral Commission was forced to reassure the public that using a pencil will not cost them their vote.

A spokesman added that people are more than welcome to bring their own pens if they wish.

He said: 'By tradition, pencils are available in polling booths for voters to mark their ballot papers,' a spokesperson said. 'If a voter wishes to bring their own pen and use that, it's fine.'

'In regards to security, at the count there are statutory observers to make sure that they are carried out correctly. Campaigners are also invited to observe the counts taking place.' 







Tony Blair was relentlessly mocked today after he tweeted a pictured of himself smiling and holding a placard that declared: 'I voted Remain' in the EU referendum

One user tweeted a picture of Blair with the slogan: 'Will Work for Cheese' while another compared the former PM to the Republican US Presidential nominee Donald Trump 

The final polls ahead of yesterday's EU referendum suggested the result was still too close to call.

An average of the last six polls by Professor John Curtice, who was the only pollster to correctly predict the outcome of last year's General Election, suggested a four-point win for Remain.

An exclusive survey for the Daily Mail and ITV News, gave the Remain camp a lead of six points, by 48 per cent to 42 per cent – but 11 per cent of electors said they were still undecided. 

The final few polls of the referendum campaign suggested the result will go down to the wire, with a YouGov survey giving a Remain a two-point lead and polls by TNS and Opinium showing the reverse 

A polling station was told to take down England flags after voters complained they could sway people in favour of Brexit.

Pictures of Mayfield Athletic Club in Enfield, north London decked out in St George's flags emerged on Twitter yesterday, with one voter saying it 'looked like an EDL rally'.

The elections watchdog told MailOnline that although the polling station had not breached electoral law ordered, they had advised the venue to take the flags down to avoid confrontation and further concerns from voters. 

Pictures of Mayfield Athletic Club (pictured) decked out in St George's flags emerged on Twitter yesterday, with one voter saying it 'looked like an EDL rally'

It also told the polling station to switch off the TV, which was showing rolling coverage and some suggested it could also be used to sway the result. 

Another polling station in Harrow was also accused of bias by hanging up on Union  flags. Voter Carly Minsky said it was 'pretty overt manipulation'.

Guidance published by the Electoral Commission states that polling stations 'must not wear any badges, slogans or colours that might bring your impartiality into question'.

Voters claimed that hanging flags violated these rules but others insisted a national flag could not be seen as bias. 

A spokesman for Enfield Council said the cricket club had put up the flags because it was screening Euro 2016 football games. 

It is not illegal to take photos inside polling stations but revealing how other people voted is a criminal offence and can carry a fine of up to £5,000. 



This is the moment police took the name of a pro-Brexit supporter who offered voters the use of her pen in case of fraud. 



Some Vote Leave have claimed that using the pencil usually found in polling stations is dangerous because their cross could be rubbed out and changed, even claiming MI5 are involved.

Jacqueline Jackson, who was outside a Winchester polling station, filmed the officer taking her details as she argued she was allowed to lend her pen to anyone entering.

She then tweeted the footage and said: 'Police came to Chichester polling station called by REMAIN side to stop me LENDING my PEN to all voters.#fraud'. 

Many have used the hashtag 'usepens' to encourage others to refuse to use a pencil, although it has since been hijacked by Remain campaigners who are calling them conspiracy theorists. 

Police spoke to a Ukip supporter who was offering to lend a pen to voters in case of fraud - they then took her details

Concerns: A poll released this week revealed that many Leave campaigners feared that the referendum was rigged against them - so many are bringing their own pens

#usepens:  Twitter is full of messages urging people to vote with a pen after Leave campaigners said they were concerned their vote with a pencil could be rubbed out. This is one of many tweets lampooning the theory



Anxious: Many on the Leave side have spread the advice -  as a poll found that many Leave supporters feared the referendum is rigged



A poll released this week revealed that many Leave campaigners fear that yesterday's referendum was rigged against them. 

The idea was widely mocked, including by BBC star Professor Brian Cox who tweeted: 'I voted in pencil just in case MI5 need to change it later'.



The Electoral Commission was forced to reassure the public that using a pencil will not cost them their vote.

A spokesman added that people are more than welcome to briong their own pens if they wish.

He said: 'By tradition, pencils are available in polling booths for voters to mark their ballot papers,' a spokesperson said. 'If a voter wishes to bring their own pen and use that, it's fine.'

'In regards to security, at the count there are statutory observers to make sure that they are carried out correctly. Campaigners are also invited to observe the counts taking place.'  

Joke: BBC star Professor Brian Cox tweeted: 'I voted in pencil just in case MI5 need to change it later'.

Statement: The Electoral Commission has been forced to reassure the public that using a pencil will not cost them their vote



