Britain First denies connection to attacker who witnesses claimed shouted support for the party before killing MP Jo Cox

2016-6-16



Far-right movement Britain First has tonight denied any connection to the suspect who shot and repeatedly stabbed Labour MP Jo Cox in a horrific attack outside her constituency surgery.

The 41-year-old married mother-of-two was shot three times - once in the head - and stabbed by a gunman who opened fire on her in the Birstall area of Leeds as she arrived to meet constituents.

It was claimed that the man - named locally as 53-year-old 'loner' and handyman Tommy Mair - shouted 'Britain First' as he launched the attack, which occurred at around 1pm.

However, Britain First - a British nationalist political party which campaigns against immigration, multiculturalism and Islam - has now distanced itself from the attack and denied any connection.

The group's leader, former British National Party councillor Paul Golding, claimed the attacker could have shouted 'It's time to put Britain first', as he dismissed the accounts as 'hearsay'.



Britain First, a far-right and British nationalist political party, distanced itself from the attack today despite the attacker apparently shouting 'Britain First' as he stabbed and shot Ms Cox, who later died. Pictured: The groups' leader Paul Golding took to its official website to issue a video condemning the 'heinous' attack

Popular MP Jo Cox  died after she was shot three times and stabbed repeatedly by a man as she arrived for a constituency meeting in Birstall near Leeds today. She leaves behind her husband Brendan and two children

The leader of the far right movement said: 'She has been out campaigning to keep Britain in the EU and there are people in the area that are against it.

'I don't think it was one of our supporters. We stand in elections and organise protests - we don't encourage this kind of nonsense.

'She has a young family - an attack on a mum like that is disgraceful.

'Whether you agree with Labour, to have had that happen to her on the streets is shocking and an indictment of the state of this country.'

In a video message released following the announcement that Ms Cox had died from her injuries, he added: 'This is a terrible day for our democracy, for our parliamentary system. Our MPs are the representatives of the people and they have been for over 400 years now.

'So this is a very dark day for our country and for our democracy.

'We do not know what was said. At the moment, it is pure hearsay.

'It's an attack on a mother, it's an attack on our parliamentary system. It's just a downright act of criminality on the streets of Yorkshire. That's what we believe, that's what we think.

'I hope the person who carried out this heinous crime gets what he deserves.'

Ms Cox with her husband Brendan on election night when she was elected as an MP for Batley and Spen

A picture has been circulated on social media that is said to show the suspect being arrested after the attack

Britain First, which was founded in 2011 by Jim Downson, an anti-abortion campaigner linked to Ulster loyalist militants, is in favour of preserving what it deems 'traditional British culture'.

The movement first attracted attention by protesting outside homes of alleged Islamists. It has also been known to carry out 'Christian patrols' and 'invasions' of British mosques and is known for online activism.

It has contested elections to the House of Commons, the European Parliament and the mayoralty of London, but has not held any elected posts. 

The group is also against immigration - an issue which Ms Cox has spoken positively about.



In her first speech after becoming an MP she praised the positive impact immigration has had on her constituency, Batley and Spen, a semi-rural area near the city of Leeds that has seen high levels of immigration from South Asia.

'Our communities have been deeply enhanced by immigration, be it of Irish Catholics across the constituency or of Muslims from Gujarat in India or from Pakistan, principally from Kashmir,' she said in the speech on June 3 last year.

She had also been voting to 'Remain' in the EU ahead of the referendum. 



Locals have named and identified 'loner' Tommy Mair as the 53-year-old man who has been arrested by police

This picture was taken of the man believed to be the suspect seconds after he was tackled to the ground

A view of the scene of the shooting outside the library in Birstall, where Ms Cox was attending a meeting

It has raised suspicions that her attacker was opposing her political views when he fatally shot her.

However, Britain First  issued a statement denying any involvement or encouragement in the attack, suggesting that the phrase 'could have been a slogan rather than a reference to our party'.

A spokesman said: 'Britain First obviously is not involved and would never encourage behaviour of this sort.'

Earlier this year, the deputy leader of Britain First led a 'Christian patrol' through the streets of Luton, insulting the Muslims who live there.

Brandishing large white crosses, the group - led by Jayda Fransen – was caught on camera marching through the Bedfordshire town.

She could be seen rounding upon a Muslim woman, with her two young children, telling her that the reason she has to cover herself from head to toe is because 'Muslim men cannot control their urges'.

One man also could be heard shouting that Mohammed is a 'false prophet' in the video, which was viewed almost two million times on YouTube.

Earlier this year, the deputy leader of Britain First - Jayda Fransen - led a 'Christian patrol' through the streets of Luton, insulting the Muslims who live there. She is pictured above brandishing a large white 'Christian' cross

Britain First also previously caused controversy by saying there are 'far too many Muslims' in London.

The statement, released earlier this month, read: 'As became blatantly obvious with the election of Labour's Islamist mayor, there is an increasingly shrinking number of Britons left in the capital overall and far too many Muslims.

'Britons make up less than 45 per cent of the capital and at least half of those who remain will be the 'trendy' left wing chattering class types, the gormless liberals and bigoted white socialists in areas such as Camden, Islington etc.' 

Police officers are maintaining a 'significant and large crime scene' in the area where Mrs Cox was killed today



