SEBASTIAN SHAKESPEARE: Lady Cover-up Suzanne Heywood lands job in multi-billion Euro fund 

2016-6-18

Pro-EU puppet-master Sir Jeremy Heywood can count on his wife’s support as he pulls strings for Britain to stay in Europe.

As the Cabinet Secretary battles against Brexit from the Government’s shadowy referendum ‘war room’, Lady Heywood has joined the payroll of one of Europe’s richest business dynasties: Italy’s billionaire Agnelli family.

I can disclose that high-flying Suzanne, 47, left her job as a partner at McKinsey & Co earlier this year to become managing director at Exor, the £5.8 billion investment company controlled by the family called ‘Italy’s answer to the Kennedys’.

Lady Heywood, pictured with her husband Jeremy, has joined the payroll of one of Europe’s richest business dynasties: Italy’s billionaire Agnelli family

Just weeks after Lady Heywood accepted the ‘exciting opportunity’, Sir Jeremy — dubbed Sir Cover-Up for his attempts to limit public information — was accused of ‘constitutional vandalism’, as it emerged he was plotting to distribute pro-EU propaganda to 500,000 public officials.

Sir Cover-Up recently refused to disclose details of his meetings with the Britain Stronger In Europe campaign because it wasn’t in the ‘public interest’. But there is no denying the cosy nexus of vested interests represented by the Agnellis, who once controlled 4.4 per cent of Italy’s gross domestic product.

Their Exor fund owns stakes in Fiat, which Agnelli patriarch Giovanni Agnelli founded in 1899, Ferrari and Turin football club Juventus.

The Agnellis also control the Economist Group, where Lady Heywood sits on the board alongside Exor’s curly haired boss, Agnelli heir John Elkann.

Which celebrity chef cooked up a spicy affair with her publishing boss? 

Conveniently, the editorial office of the influential pro-Remain Economist magazine is next-door to Exor’s London HQ on St James’s Street, where Lady Heywood is based.

Lady Heywood’s connections have served her well before. In 2013, while at Mc-Kinsey, she landed a £600,000 management consultancy contract with the BBC, thanks to her friendship with Beeb director-general Tony Hall from his time running the Royal Opera House, where Lady Heywood is a trustee.

Never a wrong career note for Sir Cover-Up and his wife (pictured receiving his knighthood in 2012), who met in the Nineties when both were working at the Treasury — although family life seems to play second fiddle.

In a magazine profile on ‘extreme workers’ in 2011, Suzanne said: ‘My PA has my rules for making sure that I am spending enough time at home or with the children.’

The night Kate Moss sang Stand by Your Man

Kate Moss performing Stand By Your Man  with The Pretenders singer Chrissie Hynde, 64.

Occasion: The 10th anniversary party of the Hoping Foundation to raise money for Palestinian refugee children, hosted by fashion designer Bella Freud.

Venue: Ronnie Scott’s jazz club in Soho.

Guests: Actress Gillian Anderson, hairstylist John Frieda, actor Bill Nighy, socialites Lady Alice Manners and Poppy Delevingne, make-up artist Charlotte Tilbury, musicians Van Morrison and Noel Gallagher.

Highlight: Kate Moss performing Stand By Your Man (above) with The Pretenders singer Chrissie Hynde, 64.

Talking point: Kate Moss, 42, was introducing her toyboy beau Count Nikolai von Bismarck, 29, to all her celebrity chums. ‘It was like an official coming out party,’ said one guest.

First wives’ club: Jemima Goldsmith cosied up to her brother Ben’s ex Kate Rothschild  as well as her brother Zac’s ex-wife Sheherazade.

Hardest partygoer: Noel Gallagher continued partying at the Chiltern Firehouse until 5am.

Bravura performance: A fragile Shane MacGowan had to be carried on stage to sing.

Social butterfly: Naomi Campbell flitted in and out and didn’t linger long.

Belle of the ball: President Bill Clinton’s ex-lover and former White House intern Monica Lewinsky.

Jemima Goldsmith cosied up to her brother Ben’s ex Kate Rothschild (left) and right, President Bill Clinton’s ex-lover and former White House intern Monica Lewinsky

You never can sink a Bismarck in Speedos 

Talking of Kate Moss, is the party girl seeing triple?

No, her 29-year-old toyboy beau Count Nikolai von Bismarck (centre, below) took time out from his supermodel dalliance to catch up with two of his three younger brothers — Caspar, 24, (left) and Sascha, 21 — for this revealing snap Caspar posted on Facebook.

Count Nikolai von Bismarck (centre) took time out from his supermodel dalliance to catch up with two of his three younger brothers — Caspar, 24, (left) and Sascha, 21 — for this revealing snap Caspar posted on Facebook

The three siblings and their fourth brother Tassilo, 27, a banker who once interned for Senator John McCain in Washington, reportedly like to dress in the same outfits.

Or almost no clothes, judging by this shot of them in their Speedos. They also share a love of partying, inherited from dad Leopold, who is often found sporting a fez and smoking a fat cigar at the raucous parties he and wife Debonnaire throw in their grand house in Belgravia.

Caspar, who is currently studying at New York University alongside Sascha, once threw a decadent birthday party at the family home complete with piles of Krispy Kreme doughnuts and a fishnet-tights-wearing pole dancer.

Spies say Royal party guest Princess Eugenie was the exotic dancer’s biggest fan.

She played a passionate QC in BBC1 legal drama Silk. Now actress Maxine Peake, 41, has taken on Lord Fellowes for his snobbery regarding understanding Shakespeare’s work.

‘I’m sorry to bang on about it but I think it’s a class thing,’ she says. ‘Julian Fellowes said, really rather ignorantly, not so long ago that you need to be educated to be able to handle Shakespeare. I think it’s an absolutely ridiculous thing to say.

‘It’s words at the end of the day and, actually, if you make sense of it but it’s not what the perceived sense of it is, well then who cares, it’s your sense.’

Does that make sense, M’lud?

Bond's mini villain 

Warwick Davis might not be that tall or scary-looking, but he reckons he has what it takes to play the baddie in a Bond film.

The 46-year-old actor, who stands just 3ft 6in high, first found fame in Star Wars as a child actor in Return Of The Jedi.

‘I’d love to get my teeth into playing the villain,’ he says. ‘Bond would most likely underestimate me as a result of my stature — and that could be his downfall!”

Selfie of the week

Best known as the sister of air-head party girl Paris, hotel heiress Nicky Hilton is now aiming to join Amal Clooney and Angelina Jolie in the ranks of glamorous world stateswomen.

Nicky Hilton was invited to meet U.S. President Barack Obama with banking heir James Rothschild

This week, the 32-year-old American was invited to meet U.S. President Barack Obama with banking heir James Rothschild, 31, whom she married last year. It’s not clear why the couple met Obama, but Nicky — who is expecting her first child — posted this picture of the encounter online.

She told her social media followers: ‘My husband and I discussing parenthood with Barack Obama — he biasedly said girls are the best.’

New 'grandson' for Middleton

Dust off the christening hats. Michael Middleton is a grand-father for the third time around. Well, an honorary grandfather.

Four years ago, Michael — pater of the Duchess of Cambridge — gave away bride Thierry Kelaart in the absence of her father, the late Paul Kelaart, a furniture restorer who died in 1992.

Now Thierry and husband Patrick Heathcoat-Amory have had a son named Atticus.

Both Kate and sister Pippa — who was a contemporary of Thierry at Edinburgh University — attended the wedding, held in an Oxfordshire village church.

The following day, Thierry’s mother, Anne, invited Michael and Carole Middleton back for shepherd’s pie.

‘We’re close family friends,’ Anne said of Michael walking her daughter down the aisle, the year after he did the honours for Kate in Westminster Abbey. ‘That covers it beautifully.’

Ladies’ man Jude Law reveals there can be a downside to having women chasing after you. 

‘I get a lot of things through the post, little gifts,’ he says. 

‘I once got sent someone’s fingernails, which was very odd. They said they wanted me to have a part of them. I’ve signed pregnant bellies several times as well, which I always find a bit weird.’ 

You can quote me on that 

‘I just love myself. I’m very deeply in love with myself.’

Actor Brian Blessed

‘I’m rubbish with babies. I need things that can speak.’

Emily Maitlis

‘Women can conquer the world. We might not have a penis, but we certainly have balls!’

Barbara Taylor Bradford, 83,

‘I can turn down my charisma, I can’t turn it off.’

Gary Goldsmith reveals his inflated ego

‘My male friends don’t seem to have any feelings of intimidation that I’m a 100-watt sex bomb standing next to them.’

Kim Cattrall

‘I play the fiddle, but I like to wait until very late at night when people are plenty drunk and won’t be able to pay attention to the terrible noises I make.’

Jeremy Irons

