Tony Blair warns there 'will be big consequences' after the country's vote for Brexit and hits out at Corbyn's leadership 

2016-6-24

The strongly pro-EU former Prime Minister Tony Blair has said there will be 'very big consequences' after the country voted to leave the European Union

Former Prime Minister Tony Blair has said there will be 'very big consequences' after the country voted to leave the European Union.

Mr Blair said Brexit made him 'sad for our country, for Europe, for the world' and hit out at Jeremy Corbyn's lacklustre leadership of the party during the campaigning months.

He said the Labour leadership was 'pretty lukewarm in its support for Remain' and failed to mobilise its supporters 'to understand that this was not a protest vote against the Government or indeed the Establishment'. 

Criticising the Labour campaign, Mr Blair said the 'enormous consequences' had not been properly set out to its core support - who voted for Leave in significant numbers. 

Asked if Mr Corbyn should quit, Mr Blair said: 'I think there are much, much bigger questions for the Labour Party right now.

'We've got to consider what our purpose is, where we are going and what we are trying to do here.' 

In an interview with Sky News, he said: 'The answers to the challenges of globalisation do not lie in shutting ourselves off from the world.

'And I think what we will learn in these days, weeks and months ahead, I'm afraid, is that you can ride the anger through these populist movements but you don't actually produce the answers to the challenges people face... We will find that what people thought was going to be an answer to these problems is not an answer at all.' 



Mr Blair said Mr Cameron was 'definitely right not to invoke Article 50 straight away', contradicting his successor's demand in the immediate aftermath of the vote.

He said he expected turmoil in the financial markets to continue and said the next steps had to be taken 'with a sense of unity across the political spectrum'.  

Mr Blair said Leave campaigners had dismissed warnings of the danger of Brexit as 'scaremongering'.

'I think you can see from the reactions already, those threats are real,' he said, warning that 'the reality of the choice we've made is going to sink into the public consciousness in a big way in the days and weeks to come'.

Criticising the Labour campaign, Mr Blair said the 'enormous consequences' had not been properly set out to its core support - who voted for Leave in significant numbers

Mr Blair, pictured today, said Labour needs to 'get its act together' and find the 'answers to the problems people face' 

Former prime minister Tony Blair  leaves via the rear entrance of Westminster Tower after saying that Brexit made him 'sad for our country, for Europe, for the world' 

Mr Blair said he hoped Leave leaders like Boris Johnson and Michael Gove would 'reflect on the real interests of our country' as they saw the impact of the Brexit vote unfold. 



He said in the US and Europe, 'the centre left and centre right have lost political traction' while 'the populist insurgent movements of left and right are taking control'. 

'We will find that what people thought was going to be an answer to these problems is not an answer at all.'

Labour needs to 'get its act together' and find 'the answers to the problems people face', he said.

Defending his decision to admit workers from new EU member states in 2004, Mr Blair said: 'Although I understand the pressures that people from eastern Europe coming in living and working in this country have (created), I actually believe on the whole those people pay far more in taxes than they receive in benefits and they are good people, they are decent people and they have contributed to our country.'

It would be important to send a signal to these people - particularly those working in the NHS - that they are 'still welcome here', he said.  

Until the Lisbon Treaty was signed, the EU had no formal legal process for members to leave.

But when member states were negotiating the 2007 agreement – which came into force two years later – they inserted Article 50.

This spells out the process by which governments can give the EU notice of their intention to leave the bloc.

Activating Article 50 fires the starting gun on a two-year negotiation, after which the member state automatically ceases to be in the EU.

Any new deal on membership terms must be signed off by a two-thirds majority of the European Council and be approved by the European Parliament.

The deadline can only be extended by a unanimous vote of the Council members.

Elsewhere former EU Commissioner Peter Mandelson said it was the 'worst day in post-war British history' as he called for Mr Corbyn to quit.

The former business secretary said: 'He seemed to be travelling through the entire referendum with a handbrake on'.

Mr Mandelson, a former MP for Hartlepool, also said people in the North East 'were sold this ridiculous notion that coming out of the European Union was some sort of 'magic bullet' to solve all our country's problems with immigration.'

'You should've looked really at the small print of what the Leave people were saying,' he said. 'They didn't have one shred of an idea, not one single policy that explained how immigration would be changed if we came out of the European Union…

'I really regret we were not more successful in countering that ridiculous, fantasy politics and propaganda that spewed out of the Leave campaign.'

Former Labour spin doctor Alastair Campbell said Britain was now in 'uncharted territory' and warned the break-up of the UK will follow.

He was also critical of Mr Corbyn, telling ITV News: 'I don't think there is anybody who can seriously think that Jeremy Corbyn connected with so many of these people who have been lost.

'We saw what happened in Scotland and I think we are now seeing something similar in parts of the North of England. I think the whole question of the union now comes into view.' 

The Labour leader insisted was not resigning despite a motion of no confidence being tabled by MPs

Labour grandee Dame Margaret Hodge and backbencher Ann Coffey today tabled a formal motion of no confidence in Mr Corbyn, saying it was time for him to go.

MPs will vote on the motion next week in a secret ballot.

But Mr Corbyn, a lifelong Eurosceptic, brushed aside calls to quit, telling Channel Four News tonight: 'I will not resign'.

He said: 'Of course I want to lead this party in order to put forward an alternative and lead this party to win the election as soon as it comes'.  

He added: 'I'm carrying on. I'm making the case for unity, I'm making the case of what Labour can offer to Britain, of decent housing for people, of good secure jobs for people, of trade with Europe and of course with other parts of the world. 

'Because if we don't get the trade issue right we've got a real problem in this country.' 

 



  





