Now Bank of England claims Brexit fears are ALREADY stopping us from buying cars and houses

2016-6-16

People are already holding off on buying homes and cars because of fears over a Brexit vote, the Bank of England has warned.

The Bank said 'major economic decisions' were increasingly being put on hold ahead of the crucial referendum next week. 

Policy makers also said it was 'increasingly probable' that the value of the Pound will slump if we vote for Brexit.

The assessment - in the latest minutes of the Monetary Policy committee - came as the Bank's governor Mark Carney insisted he has every right to comment on the economic impact of Brexit.

He was angrily accused of breaking impartiality rules by leading Leave campaigner Bernard Jenkin.

Mark Carney, whose Bank of England today warned individual's major economic decisions are being postponed by the referendum, has been involved in an angry clash with a Tory MP 

The Bank insisted it is 'increasingly probable' a Leave vote in next week's referendum would sharply damage the value of Sterling across international money markets.

Financial experts warned uncertainty surrounding the outcome of the poll is already forcing consumers to put off 'major economic decisions' and provoking a slowdown in house and car sales.

The Bank insisted the referendum remains the 'largest immediate risk' facing financial markets, as its Monetary Policy Committee decided to hold rates at the 0.5 per cent level they have been at since March 2009.

The latest foray into the increasingly bitter referendum debate came after an angry war of words exploded between Mr Carney and prominent Tory MP and Leave campaigner Mr Jenkin.

Bank sources revealed Mr Carney considers a letter from Mr Jenkin stating that the governor had made his views on the referendum public despite strict impartiality rules to be a 'political threat'.

Commons Public Administration Committee chairman Mr Jenkin hit back by branding the governor 'very aggressive'.

Mr Jenkin branded the Governor's letter 'very aggressive' and slammed him for surrendering his independence 

In a strident response, Mr Carney said Mr Jenkin's letter contained 'numerous and substantial misconceptions'.

Mr Carney also accused Mr Jenkin of having a 'fundamental misunderstanding' about the independence of the Bank.

The governor wrote: 'All of the public comments that I, and other Bank officials, have made regarding issues related to the referendum have been limited to factors that affect the Bank's statutory responsibilities and have been entirely consistent with our remits.'

Mr Jenkin said Mr Carney's intervention in the referendum debate has gone 'way beyond what a Bank governor would normally do in terms of making statements about rate setting and economic forecasts'.

He told BBC Radio 4's Today programme: 'He has reacted very, very aggressive towards me.

'There is no doubt that the appearance he made on the Andrew Marr programme went way beyond what a Bank governor would normally do in terms of making statements about rate setting and economic forecasts. 

'I obviously misconstrued that because in my letter to him I said he had made his views clear that he wants the United Kingdom to stay in the European Union.'

The Prime Minister said: 'If we vote to leave the European Union, we are facing higher unemployment, less growth, we're facing a falling pound, therefore rising prices.

'The price of the family shop would go up. There would be fewer jobs, fewer opportunities. This is a risk to every family in Britain. This couldn't be clearer. We shouldn't risk it.'

Prime Minister David Cameron, pictured with motoring duo Jeremy Clarkson and James May today, noted the latest warnings from the Bank of England and said it showed Britain should not 'risk' Brexit 

Mr Cameron added: 'The Bank of England is independent. It's independent in law, and the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England has met and has discussed the risks of leaving the European Union and they couldn't be clearer.' 

Vote Leave Chief Executive Matthew Elliott said: 'All the latest indicators show that the British economy is doing well despite George Osborne and Mark Carney's attempts to whip up fear in the markets. Manufacturing is up, retail sales are increasing and more people are in work.

'Mark Carney earned millions when he was an investment banker at Goldman Sachs.

'Goldman Sachs made huge profits when it dishonestly cooked the books so that Greece could join the euro and we all know what a disaster that has been. Goldman Sachs is now bankrolling the IN campaign.' 



Lord Darling, Labour ex-chancellor, accused Mr Jenkin of engaging in a 'blatant attempt to muzzle a respected independent voice'.

Vote Leave chief Matthew Elliott dismissed the report as another attempt to 'whip up' fears over Brexit ahead of next week's referendum 

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn suggested supporters of his party may be backing the Brexit option because they do not understand what Leave would mean.

'I think a lot of people haven't understood the relationship with the European Union, haven't appreciated the amount of investment that's come in to many parts of this country,' he said.

'I think that many people don't realise that the implications of voting to leave on the 23rd could be quite serious - could be quite serious in export industries that rely on selling goods across Europe.'

Despite growing calls in Labour's top team for reform of free movement of workers' rules, Mr Corbyn insisted: 'The European Union actually depends on the movement of people across the continent.'

European Commission president Jean-Claude Juncker has warned UK voters 'would be best advised' to oppose Brexit.

Speaking in St Petersburg, Russia, he said withdrawal would spark 'a period of major uncertainty' for both Britain and the EU.

 

