The final push: Cameron, Johnson and Corbyn criss-cross the country in last frantic round of referendum campaigning

2016-6-22

The big beasts of the EU referendum battle are engaged in a final frantic round of campaigning on the eve of the crucial poll.

David Cameron joined forces with former PM Sir John Major and Labour's Harriet Harman for a rally in Bristol before travelling to Oxfordshire, Banbury and then Birmingham.

Meanwhile, Boris Johnson has visited the famous Billingsgate Fish market as he traversed the country in a Vote Leave helicopter.

The ex-mayor of London then headed north, visiting Selby and Darlington before signing off his campaign. 

As the final salvoes of the campaigns were released, the referendum battle went down to the wire tonight as a major pollster declared the race a 'statistical dead heat' based on its final snapshot of voters.

6.15pm: David Cameron made his final pitch to voters in Birmingham, appearing with Gordon Brown and leading politicians from across the political spectrum at an end of campaign rally 

5.30pm:  Boris Johnson stopped off at the George Pub in Darlington to pour a pint and press the case for Vote Leave as he scrambled around the country making his final pitch

4.30pm: David Cameron received a noisy welcome from school children as he arrived at the Warriner School in Bloxham, near Banbury 

Opinium recorded a tiny lead for Brexit in its final survey of 3,000 voters this week as it found 45 per cent backed Leave and 44 per cent backed Remain.

But after taking into account the margin of error in the study, the firm declared it impossible to predict a winner.

A week ago, Opinium had the referendum tied at 44 per cent each while at the start of June the pollster had Remain ahead 43-41.

The poll fits with the mixed found by all of the polling firms in the last week of the race, with some results showing small leads for either side while other showed a tie.  

2.30pm: The Vote Leave campaign arrived in Selby, North Yorkshire as Boris Johnson pressed the case for Brexit with just a few hours until the polls opened 

2.19pm: Planes carrying pro-Remain banners staged a fly-past at the Houses of Parliament this afternoon

2pm: David Cameron and Harriet Harman met farmer David Christensen on Kington Hill Farm in Abingdon, Oxfordshire as he continued his campaign this afternoon 

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn addressed activists in central London, while planes trailing Remain banners staged a flypast at the Houses of Parliament.  

During the rally in Bristol, Mr Cameron urged voters to stick with Brussels to ensure a 'bigger better Britain'.

He rejected Leave claims that Britain would be 'shackled to a corpse' if it chose to stick in the EU, telling supporters in Bristol the Remain case could be summed up in the single word: 'Together'.

'If we want a bigger economy and more jobs, we are better if we do it together,' the PM said.

'If we want to fight climate change, we are better if we do it together. If we want to win against the terrorists and keep our country safe, we are better if we do it together.' 

Sir John took a swipe at Mr Johnson and Justice Secretary Michael Gove as 'gravediggers of our prosperity', suggesting he had 'expected better' from them.

1pm: Jeremy Corbyn addressed activists in central London after speaking at the Unison conference in Brighton this morning

The former London Mayor took to the skies in a helicopter to continue the push for Brexit

Mr Johnson has appealed for voters to make the EU referendum Britain's 'Independence Day'

Quitting the EU would not stem immigration and risked creating a broken Britain, he insisted.

Leaving would be a 'disproportionate' response to migration concerns and the country would live to regret it for a 'long time to come'. 

He said: 'If our nation does vote to leave, we must respect their decision, but if they vote to leave on the basis of half-truths and untruths and misunderstandings, then pretty soon the grave-diggers of our prosperity will have some very serious questions to answer.'

'They will have to account for what they have said and done but that will be of little consolation for we will be out, out for good, diminished as an influence on the world. 

11.30am: Nigel Farage brandished his passport with EU markings during an appearance in London

'A truly Great Britain shrunk down to a little England perhaps without Scotland, perhaps with a grumpy Wales, and certainly with a Northern Ireland divided from the south by the border the controls that would then be the edge of the European Union.'

Dismissing accusations that the Remain campaign had been 'project fear', he insisted that Mr Cameron had a 'duty' to to warn the nation of the dangers of quitting.

10.30am: David Cameron was in Bristol at a rally with former Prime Minister Sir John Major and Labour's Harriet Harman

Sir John took a swipe at Mr Johnson and Michael Gove, branding them the 'gravediggers of our prosperity'

He said: 'In return for doing that he has faced a great deal of opposition and sometimes abuse from people who, frankly, we might have expected better from.

'I think the way in which he has conducted himself in putting the country before self and the country before party is quite remarkable.' 



Mr Johnson, however, said it was 'time to break away from the failing and dysfunctional EU system', telling activists in Maldon, Essex: 'I do think that we are on the verge, possibly, of an extraordinary event in the history of our country and indeed in the whole of Europe.

'It's all going to be about getting our supporters out to vote and if we do it I really think tomorrow can be independence day.'

10am: Mr Cameron and Mrs Harman went to the offices of sports distribution firm Shiner in Bristol

Mr Cameron, seen inspecting a skateboard with Shiner chief executive Charlie Allen, said Britain would be 'bigger and better' if it stayed in the EU

Criss-crossing the country by plane, Mr Johnson signed autographs and posed for selfies in Ashby-de-la-Zouch.

But he was heckled by 17-year-old Will Taylor who said: 'I'm annoyed that I can't vote and as a young person it's my future.'

In a speech to Unison's annual conference in Brighton this morning, Mr Corbyn said Labour supported EU membership but wanted reform.

11am: Mr Johnson went on a walkabout in Ashby de la Zouch as part of his final push for Brexit today

The former London mayor posed for selfies and chatted to members of the public during his visit

Thursday's vote will be one of the most 'significant ' decisions ever taken in this country, he said.

Mr Corbyn added: 'Labour formed the NHS, creating healthcare as a human right. That does not apply to most countries in the world. We have to defend that principle to our dying day.'

He also attacked comments by supporters of Brexit against a health service free on demand.

'A vote to leave will put the NHS in jeopardy,' he told the Brighton conference.'

The veteran left-winger later addressed a rally in central London. 



7am: Boris Johnson kicked off his frenetic last round of campaigning at London's famous Billingsgate Market this morning

 

