'I'm not a lover of the EU and it must change dramatically,' says Jeremy Corbyn as he lashes out at David Cameron's 'poisonous' and 'catastrophist' Remain campaign

2016-6-20

Jeremy Corbyn tonight lashed out at the 'poisonous' and 'catastrophist' warnings peddled by David Cameron in the EU referendum as he admitted: 'I'm not a lover of the European Union'.

He insisted Europe will need to change 'quite dramatically' if Britain decides to stay in the EU as he made his final pitch to voters ahead of Thursday's historic referendum.

He warned of 'massive' implications if Britain leaves the EU but again insisted there will never be an upper limit on immigration into the UK as long as we stay in. 

But the Labour leader, a life-long Eurosceptic, revealed his anti-EU views as he hit out at the EU for crippling Greece with austerity and failing to deal with the refugee crisis last year. 





He said Brussels must change regardless of whether Britain stays in as he told an audience of young voters: 'If we stay in Europe there are implications,' describing Thursday's vote as a 'turning point' for the continent.

Jeremy Corbyn tonight lashed out at the 'poisonous' and 'catastrophist' warnings peddled by David Cameron in the EU referendum as he admitted: 'I'm not a lover of the European Union'

The Labour leader said he 'doubts' the public 'truly understand' why we are holding a referendum on EU membership.  

Mr Corbyn was facing questions  an audience of young voters at the Sky News studios in West London as the EU referendum enters its final hours ahead of Thursday's historic vote.

He took the opportunity to hit out at Nigel Farage for his 'bigoted' poster telling voters to back Brexit because Europe was at 'breaking point' with Syrian refugees. 

And he praised Angela Merkel for welcoming Syrian refugees to Europe during the midst of the crisis, despite her move being blamed for hundreds of thousands of people making the dangerous journey across the Mediterranean to flee the violence in the Middle East. 



The Labour leader again defended Europe's open door immigration policy, insisting freedom of movement was crucial for the EU's single market. 

Instead of blaming migrants for driving down wages in the UK, people should instead look to exploitative businessmen such as Sports Direct boss Mike Ashley, who he said was responsible for the acceleration of controversial zero-hours contracts and poor working conditions in Britain. 

Tensions in both camps are high, with polls showing the vote is too close to call and leading politicians are making their final pitch to voters. 

Jeremy Corbyn (pictured) told young voters that the EU referendum campaign had been 'poisonous' as he hit out at the way figures such as David Cameron had made 'catastrophic' warnings

Jeremy Corbyn was facing questions an audience of young voters at the Sky News studios in West London as the EU referendum enters its final hours ahead of Thursday's historic vote

The audience questioned whether Jeremy Corbyn was truly in favour of leaving the EU

Leading figures in the referendum campaign have been criticised for creating a toxic atmosphere in politics in the light of Jo Cox's tragic killing last Thursday. 

Asked about the tone of the debate, Mr Corbyn was highly critical of figures such as George Osborne and Mr Cameron who have delivered dramatic warnings over the consequences of Brexit. 

'I think a lot of it has been very poisonous with catastrophist theories on one side, or both sides, and really people should rationally think about it,' he told viewers tonight. 

Jeremy Corbyn was forced to confirm he will be voting in Thursday's historic EU referendum. 

His own brother Piers Corbyn suggested the Labour leader might decide not to vote in the referendum because of his life-long Eurosceptic views. 

He voted for Britain to quit the European Community in 1975 and has opposed a string of European treaties and measures ever since - including the contentious Maastricht Treaty in the early 1990s. 

But asked tonight by Sky News political editor Faisal Islam whether he'll definitely be voting Remain on Thursday, Mr Corbyn replied: 'Yes, I'll be there.'

And dismissing his brother's suggestions, he added: 'My brother has many thoughts.'

Piers Corbyn has said he will be voting for Brexit on Thursday and has in the past hinted Mr Corbyn might do the same when he's in the private polling booth - a claim repeatedly denied by the Labour leader's team. 

'I'm not a lover of the European Union, I think it's a rational decision, we should stay in order to try and improve it but does that mean I change my views on public ownership of railways and things like that? Absolutely not.

'But it means that I want to be working with people across Europe on environmental protection, on public ownership issues and I think we'd get a long way down the line like that.' 



Asked by audience member Lucy Kendrick whether the public 'truly understand why we are having the referendum and what they are voting for,' Mr Corbyn replied: 'I hope they do but I somewhat doubt it because this is a referendum that's been discussed amongst the political classes for some years, pushed very hard by those who wish to leave the European Union.' 

'Do people fully understand all of it? Probably not, I would hope so but people I hope will just think quite seriously about it, it's a big decision.' 

He added: 'If we stay in Europe there implications, if we leave Europe there are massive implications. But it's also a turning point.'

Warning voters not to back Brexit on Thursday, Mr Corbyn said: 'I don't think there's any easy way back. If we stay I think Europe has to change dramatically. 

'There a couple of days to go and in my experience in the last two, three days when all the politicians have become exhausted the public have been increasingly interested in it.

'My view is not unconditional on the EU by any means. I'm opposed to the way in which Europe shields tax havens, this country as well does it, and the way systemically big companies use legal loop holes.

'If we challenge climate change you cannot do it in national borders. The refugee crisis has to be dealt with internationally. I want to remain in Europe in order to work to change it,' he said. 

Sky News political editor Faisal Islam (pictured right) asked Jeremy Corbyn whether he agreed the EU referendum campaign had been 'poisonous'. Corbyn (pictured left) replied: 'I think a lot of it has been very poisonous with catastrophist theories on one side, or both sides, and really people should rationally think about it'

A young woman in the audience said young people had been put off the EU referendum by 'embarrassing, clownish figures such as Boris Johnson and Nigel Farage' 

Jeremy Corbyn was grilled by an audience of under-35 year-olds at the Sky News studio in West London 

Mr Corbyn was forced to confirm he will be voting in the EU referendum - dismissing claims by his brother Piers that he might decide to abstain because of his life-long Eurosceptic views. 

'I'll be there,' Mr Corbyn joked, dismissing his brother's suggestions by telling an amused audience: 'My brother has many thoughts'. 

One audience member suggested the Labour leader's lack of passion for the EU will be blamed if Britain votes to leave the EU on Thursday, but Mr Corbyn said he was far of the mark. 

'I'm not going to take blame for people’s decision,' he said defiantly. 'There will be a decision on Thursday and I hope there will be a Remain vote - there may will be a Remain vote, there may be a Leave vote.

'Whatever the result that is the result of the referendum; we’ve got to work with it. And I would say to the EU, whatever the result, we want to see better working conditions across Europe.' 



Mr Corbyn insisted his support for a Remain vote was 'not unconditional by any means' before setting out a list of problems with Brussels, including the trade deal with the US currently being negotiated, the 'way in which Europe shields tax havens' and Brussels' failure to close loopholes in employment laws. 

But he said we must stay in the EU to tackle these problems and deal with cross-border issues such as climate change, environmental issues, and the refugee crisis.



'I want to remain in Europe in order to work with others to change it,' he said. 

Jeremy Corbyn (pictured siting down, left) faced questions from a young audience and Sky News political editor Faisal Islam (pictured far right) 

Audience member Lucy Kendrick (pictured) asked Jeremy Corbyn whether the public truly understood the issues in the EU referendum campaign 

Mr Corbyn's appearance tonight was his final big TV appearance before Thursday's referendum.  

Earlier today leading Brexit campaigner Boris Johnson today warned voters they have one chance to 'change the whole course of European history' by backing Brexit.

Last night it was David Cameron's turn to make his final TV pitch to voters, using a special Question Time show to tell voters that a strong economy underpinned everything else as he attempted to bust Vote Leave's 'myths' on the disputed £350million figure that Britain sends to the EU each week, Turkey and plans for an EU army.

Today referendum campaigning was again muted as MPs gathered in Westminster to pay tribute to Jo Cox at an emergency recall of the House of Commons in the wake of her killing on Thursday.

Mr Corbyn led the tributes to the late Labour MP and demanded 'a kinder and gentler politics' in the light of her tragic killing. 





However on the referendum the Labour leader has come under fire from all sides for his views on immigration. 

As the referendum heads into its final hours, polls are mixed. Results out over the weekend revealed a tie, Remain leads of up to 3 per cent and Leave leads of 2% 

Yesterday he admitted there was no upper limit on immigration while Britain is insdie the EU - and blamed Brussels for driving huge numbers of workers to the UK. 



But he said there should be no changes to Brussels' edicts on free movement, which allow hundreds of thousands of EU citizens to move here every year.  

This is despite immigration repeatedly being the top concern cited by Labour voters on the doorstep. 

His comments have caused frustration with fellow Remain campaigners, who are determined to shift the argument away from immigration - seen as a weak point for them - and on to the economy. 

His pro-immigration comments are also at odds with members of his own leadership team and cap a week of chaos among Labour ranks over immigration. 

Shadow chancellor John McDonnell has said in recent days that the party would 'look again' at free movement of labour.

Deputy leader Tom Watson said the party would have to make the case to revise the EU edict. He added that while he backed In, the issue of uncontrolled migration was 'coming up on the doorstep' and people needed reassurance.

Europe will need to change 'quite dramatically' if Britain decides to stay in the EU, Jeremy Corbyn said tonight as he made his final pitch to voters ahead of Thursday's historic referendum to an audience of young voters at the Sky News studios in West London

Jeremy Corbyn (pictured right alongside fellow politicians including David Cameron, deputy Labour leader Tom Watson, second left and George Osborne) led the tributes to Jo Cox and demanded 'a kinder and gentler politics' in the light of her tragic killing

Meanwhile Vote Leave has pointed to Mr Corbyn's criticisms of Brussels as proof he is a secret Outer and is only campaigning for Britain to stay in the EU because his party's MPs are predominantly pro-EU.

But Labour's Mayor of London Sadiq Khan echoed Mr Corbyn's stance on immigration, saying there should be no upper limit on the numbers coming into the UK.  

His and Mr Corbyn's remarks on immigration have been seized on by Brexit supporters as evidence that staying in the EU gives Britain no chance of controlling immigration numbers.   

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn (pictured tonight) says he shouldn't be blamed if the Remain side loses on Thursday

Jeremy Corbyn said he will not take any blame for the result if Britain votes to leave the EU on Thursday. 

The Labour leader, a life-long Eurosceptic, has been heavily criticised by Remain campaigners in and out of the party over his lack of passion for the EU in the referendum campaign. 

But tonight, pressed on whether he will shoulder some of the blame in the event of a Brexit vote, said: 'I’m not going to take blame for people’s decision. 

'There will be a decision on Thursday and I hope there will be a Remain vote - there may will be a Remain vote, there may be a Leave vote.'

He added: 'Whatever the result that is the result of the referendum; we’ve got to work with it. 

'And I would say to the EU, whatever the result, we want to see better working conditions across Europe.

'I want to see better environmental protection across Europe – will all suffer from these things. I want to see a trade policy that doesn’t export pollution by importing goods that have been made in a deeply polluted way.

'I will be pursuing exactly the same agenda on Friday morning that I’ve put to you tonight.' 





Getting out the working-class Labour vote is seen as vital to the Remain camp's chances of success.

But, putting himself at odds with countless Labour voters, Mr Corbyn said yesterday: 'The very principle of a single market across Europe is the free movement of people.' 

Asked by the BBC if there should be an upper limit on numbers flocking here, Mr Corbyn said: 'I don't think you can have one while you have the free movement of labour.' 

He accused Brussels of driving large numbers of EU citizens to the UK through austerity, adding: 'I think the free movement of labour means you have to balance the economy, so you have to improve living standardsthat means the European Union's appalling treatment of Greece  that is a problem. 

'If you actually deliberately lower living standards and increase poverty in certain countriesyou're bound to have a flow of people looking for somewhere else to go.' 

Leave campaigners said he had laid bare the truth about immigration. 

Labour MP and Vote Leave chairman Gisela Stuart said: 'The In campaign have no answers on how we can control immigration if we stay in the EU no plan for how we will fund the NHSno plan for where we will build the extra houses  no plan to help people who will see further pressure on their pay packets.' 

Ex-Cabinet minister Iain Duncan Smith said the admission there can be no upper migration limit while Britain is in the EU was 'finally some honesty from the In campaign'. 



Referendum campaigning was again muted today as MPs gather in Westminster to pay tribute to Jo Cox at an emergency recall of the House of Commons in the wake of her killing.

A final push will begin tomorrow night when Boris Johnson takes part in the biggest live TV debate of the campaign at Wembley Arena.

He will be joined by fellow Brexit campaigners Gisela Stuart, the Labour MP and Tory energy minister Andrea Leadsom - the same threesome that took part in ITV's two-hour EU debate earlier this month. 

They will be taking on Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson, Labour's London mayor Sadiq Khan and Frances O'Grady, General Secretary of the Trade Unions Congress representing the In campaign. 





In his final newspaper column ahead of Thursday's vote today, Mr Johnson told readers: 'When you pick up your ballot paper this Thursday, you have it in your hands to transform Britain's current democratic arrangements for the better.

'You can change the whole course of European history – and if you vote Leave, I believe that change will be overwhelmingly positive. 



'If we vote Remain, we stay locked in the back of the car, driven by someone with an imperfect command of English, and going a direction we don't want to go.'

Jeremy Corbyn tonight praised Angela Merkel for welcoming Syrian refugees to Europe in the midst of the migrant crisis last summer. 

Her decision has been heavily criticised by many European leaders and some on the right of Brexit side of Britain's referendum debate as making the refugee crisis worse by encouraging more people to make the perilous journey to the continent from the Middle East. 

A participant in tonight's live EU referendum debate, an audience member described the German Chancellor's decision as the 'worst error' he had ever seen in his life.

It had led to the death of many refugees who had tried to cross the Mediterranean to reach Europe and ended up drowning as a result of Ms Merkel's words, he said. 

But Mr Corbyn said Ms Merkel's action was a 'human response' and criticised the rest of Europe for failing to follow in her lead. 

Jeremy Corbyn (pictured) tonight praised Angela Merkel for welcoming Syrian refugees to Europe in the midst of the migrant crisis last summer

'I think behind her assumption was that the rest of Europe would be prepared to play its part in providing haven for refugees,' the Labour leader said. 

Mr Corbyn insisted the refugee crisis needs a cross-border international response although some of the EU and its member states' handling of the situation, such as erecting barriers on borders, has been 'appalling'.

He said: 'If there was no European Union and instead you had 27 member states - would there be any coordinated response? Probably not.

'Would there be any route out for those refugees? Probably not.' 

He lashed out at Ukip leader Nigel Farage for his 'bigoted poster that depicted a line of male Syrian refugees crossing the Slovenian border during the migrant crisis in October and accused Ms Merkel of putting Europe at 'breaking point'.  

Jeremy Corbyn lashed out at Ukip leader Nigel Farage for his 'bigoted poster (pictured) that depicted a line of male Syrian refugees crossing the Slovenian border during the migrant crisis in October and accused Ms Merkel of putting Europe at 'breaking point'

Drawing applause from the audience, he said 'desperate' refugees pose no risk to Britain compared to the threat posed by the 'hatred' put on them by the likes of Mr Farage.

'The Syrian refugees are just like all of us in this room, they are fleeing from war looking for somewhere safe to go to,' the Labour leader said.

'Surely that has to be a humanitarian response, not the bigoted response of putting up a 32 sheet poster which says a group of desperate people are somehow or other a threat to us.

'No, they're not, they're no threat at all.

'The threat is the hatred that is put towards those people by those people that put up that poster.' 

Migrants should not be the scapegoat for low wages in the UK, Jeremy Corbyn told young voters tonight.

Instead it was businessmen such as Sports Direct boss Mike Ashley who are to blame for driving down workers' wages and accelerating the use of controversial zero-hours contracts.

He appealed for voters to back staying in the EU so Britain could work with other European countries to outlaw zero-hours contracts, which do not guarantee a minimum number of hours of work a week. 

Migrants should not be the scapegoat for low wages in the UK, Jeremy Corbyn told young voters at a Sky News debate in West London tonight 

Some EU member states had already banned them, he told young voters in a Sky News Q&A debate tonight with just three days to go until the EU referendum.  

Pressed on how Labour would help workers whose salaries were being driven down by migration, Mr Corbyn said: 'By ensuring that local wage rates are paid, that the minimum wage is respected, that the living wage becomes a reality, £10 an hour seems to me to be the figure that we should be campaigning for, but also to ensure there is lower levels of disparity so people don't necessarily feel so attracted to go and work elsewhere because they get better wages.'

The party leader said restricting movement of labour across the EU defeated the point of the Single Market.

Securing refugee status is 'very difficult' and detailed checks were carried out on anyone applying for the status,' he added.

'The idea that you can just walk in a country and announce you are a refugee and get status is far, far, far from the reality of it.' 













Boris Johnson today warned voters have one chance to 'change the whole course of European history' by backing Brexit on Thursday.

As the long-awaited referendum moves into its final hours and with the polls finely balanced, the Vote Leave champion said voters had a 'fundamental decision' to make.

Mr Johnson, who was back on the stump at Ipswich firm Trucks R Us today, said the Remain campaign was offering 'nothing... but the steady and miserable erosion of Parliamentary democracy' in Britain.

Leading Brexit campaigner Boris Johnson today warned voters they have one chance to 'change the whole course of European history' by backing Brexit on Thursday 

The former London Mayor took control on the campaign trail today ahead of Thursday's vote

David Cameron last night made his final pitch to voters in a live BBC Question Time special, insisting a strong economy underpinned everything else - but he was lashed again and again over immigration.

Referendum campaigning was again muted today as MPs gather in Westminster to pay tribute to Jo Cox at an emergency recall of the House of Commons in the wake of her killing.

A final push will begin tomorrow night when Boris Johnson takes part in the biggest live TV debate of the campaign at Wembley Arena.

In his final newspaper column before the vote, the ex-Mayor of London wrote in the Daily Telegraph: 'When you pick up your ballot paper this Thursday, you have it in your hands to transform Britain's current democratic arrangements for the better.

'You can change the whole course of European history – and if you vote Leave, I believe that change will be overwhelmingly positive. 



'If we vote Remain, we stay locked in the back of the car, driven by someone with an imperfect command of English, and going a direction we don't want to go.'

Boris Johnson returned to the campaign trail at Ipswich firm Trucks R Us today as he urged voters to seize their chance to 'change the course of European history' by endorsing Brexit on Thursday 

Mr Johnson said a Remain vote would do nothing to 'rebuke the elites in Brussels' or allow Britain to set up a trade deal with America, China or India. 

And in a clear dismissal of Mr Cameron - who just last night insisted Britain was better in the room, at the negotiating table, Mr Johnson said: 'We are not more powerful, or more influential for being around the table in Brussels.

'Look at the pitiful results of the so-called renegotiation earlier this year. We are drowned out.

'And it is an illusion to think that if we vote to Remain, we are somehow opting for the status quo. 

'The status quo is not on offer. If we stay in, we will be engaged willy-nilly in the desperate attempt to keep the euro together, by building an economic government of Europe.'

Mr Johnson said he wanted to hand 'power back to the people' because democracy was the 'best way of correcting the errors of our people'.

He said: 'Now is the time to believe in ourselves, and in what Britain can do, and to remember that we always do best when we believe in ourselves.

'Of course we can continue to provide leadership and support for Europe – but inter-governmentally, outside the supranational EU system.

'I hope you will vote Leave, and take back control of this great country's destiny; and if we Vote Leave, then all our votes will count for more in the future.

'This chance will not come again in our lifetimes, and I pray we do not miss it.'

Mr Johnson will again be joined by Labour's Gisela Stuart and Tory Andrea Leadsom when he takes to the Wembley Arena stage tomorrow night.

For the Remain side, Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson, Mayor of London Sadiq Khan and TUC chief Frances O'Grady.

In his final live TV event last night, Mr Cameron recalled Winston Churchill as he pleaded with voters to back him on Thursday. 

He said: 'In my office I sit two yards away from the Cabinet Room where Winston Churchill decided in May 1940 to fight on against Hitler - the best and greatest decision perhaps anyone's ever made in our country, right?

'He didn't want to be alone, he wanted to be fighting with the French and with the Poles and the others, but he didn't quit.

'He didn't quit in Europe, he didn't quit on European democracy, he didn't quit on European freedom.

'We want to fight for these things today and you can't win, you can't fight if you're not in the room. You can't win a football match if you're not on the pitch.'

The Prime Minister's spirited defence of the EU came after one audience member said he was a '21st century Neville Chaberlain' for hailing the deal he negotiated with the leaders of the other 27 member states.

Boris Johnson, pictured greeting workers at the truck firm today, urged voters to seize their one and only chance to quit the EU at the referendum on Thursday

David Cameron, pictured at the Mini factory today, recalled Winston Churchill as he pleaded with voters to back his Remain campaign on Thursday







David Cameron has been told by allies not to hand Boris Johnson a Cabinet job if Britain votes to stay in the EU on Thursday, it emerged today. 

Pro-EU ministers and MPs want him to scrap plans for a 'unity reshuffle,' insisting Brexit ministers and MPs had been disloyal by campaigning so vociferously the Prime Minister.

Employment minister Priti Patel has been one of the most aggressive Out campaigners who have attacked government policy despite being a Cabinet minister herself, but Justice Secretary Michael Gove - a close friend of Mr Cameron - has not held back from criticising the Government's record.  

Mr Johnson, pictured at Vote Leave's final weekend rally yesterday, said voters had the power to 'transform Britain's current democratic arrangements for the better' at Thursday's referendum 

Mr Johnson was tipped to be given a top job in government as a gesture to the Leave camp of the Tory party and an attempt to put the bitter infighting within the party to bed.

A minister campaigning for a Remain vote on Thursday told the Daily Telegraph: 'People who backed the Prime Minister and made the case for the EU would be outraged to see people who attacked the Government getting promoted.'

But failure to promote pro-Brexit Tory MPs risks causing a long-lasting rift in the party over Europe. 

Mr Gove is expected to keep his role in Cabinet, but other pro-Brexit Cabinet ministers are expected to be demoted in favour of younger, more loyal MPs. 



Chris Grayling, Leader of the House of Commons, Culture Secretary John Whittingdale and Northern Ireland Secretary Theresa Villiers could lose their jobs along with Ms Patel. 

Vote Leave campaigner Liam Fox, the former defence secretary, could return to Cabinet if Mr Cameron decides in favour of a unity reshuffle. 

However some within the party believe Mr Cameron will wait until the autumn to reshuffle his top team in order to calm tensions in the party after months of blue-on-blue civil war, which has dominated newspaper headlines and some fear done permanent damage the party's image. 

Employment minister Priti Patel (pictured) has been one of the most aggressive Out campaigners who have attacked government policy despite being a Cabinet minister herself, but Justice Secretary Michael Gove - a close friend of Mr Cameron - has not held back from criticising the Government's record

Tory peer Baroness Warsi claimed to have switched to the Remain camp

Maverick Tory peer Baroness Warsi last night claimed to have switched to the Remain camp in protest over a controversial Nigel Farage immigration poster.

However, her high-profile 'defection' was greeted with bafflement among Leave supporters - who could not remember her ever campaigning in their side.

Lady Warsi's claims were made following a day when a Ukip poster claiming migration was pushing the continent to 'breaking point' were condemned by all sides.

Last night she told The Times: 'That breaking point poster really was - for me - the breaking point to say: 'I can't go on supporting this'.

She added: 'We all feel very passionately about these issues, it's when you start to believe that any means are acceptable to achieve an end. It's not an easy decision.

'When I look at the people who are now saying the things they are saying and the people who are supporting that approach, the BNP, Donald Trump, Marine le Pen, Austria's Freedom Party — every day it feels like the far right is coming out to stand by Leave.' 

She later told the BBC: 'This kind of nudge-nudge, wink-wink xenophobic racist campaign may be politically savvy or politically useful in the short term, but it causes long-term damage to communities.

'The vision that me and other Brexiters who have been involved right from the outset, who had a positive outward-looking vision of what a Brexit vote might mean, unfortunately those voices have now been stifled.

'What we see is the divisive campaign which has resulted in people like me and others who are deeply Eurosceptic and want to see a reformed relationship feel that they now have to leave Leave.'

But a spokesman for Vote Leave said the campaign was confused by Lady Warsi's announcement.

He said: 'We don't remember Warsi ever joining our campaign so we are puzzled by her claims to have defected.'

Daniel Hannan, the high profile Tory MEP and Leave campaigner, said: 'When I invited Sayeeda Warsi to join the Leave campaign, she declined. Fair enough, obviously. But how is this a 'defection'?'



Tory MP Bernard Jenkin added: 'I helped set up Vote Leave and she has not been at a single meeting I have attended. ''Defects'' just not accurate!.' 

 



