Mud, mud, glorious mud! Festival fans dance their way through Glastonbury puddles and there's MORE rain on the way

2016-6-24

Soaked: One reveller scrambles for cover after the heavens open at Glastonbury today

They've been fighting their way through mud after being pelted with rain - and there's no sign of any let up just yet.

Forecasters predict more heavy showers will be on their way to Glastonbury today and tomorrow meaning revellers have to endure more wet weather before the entertainment really begins.

But it's not all doom and gloom as there will be spots of sunshine throughout the day and warm temperatures of 20C-22C meaning it shouldn't be too hard to dry off.

Performances began on the main stages from around 11am this morning ahead of tonight's headline gig by  Muse. 

Met Office forecaster Callum MacColl said fans should prepare for a mixed bag of a day - but they would be lucky to escape the rain.

He said: 'There will be some pleasant dry spells today but inevitably there will also be some showers in the vicinity and they could be heavy if they catch one. I would not rule out thundery showers but the risk of those is higher as you go further north.

'Going into tomorrow we will see a similar situation with the low pressure system that is currently sitting above us, with a mix of showers and sunny spells, and the area is likely to catch some rain on Sunday as there will be cloud that moves across much of the country.' 

The weather and its after effects caused problems early on, with 1990s rockers James having to delay their set by 50 minutes as the Other Stage was fenced off and woodchips laid down over the muddy ground.

Founder Michael Eavis himself appeared on the stage to thank fans for their patience and called them 'the best audience in the whole wide world'. 

Organisers have been working around the clock to ensure other entertainment - including large dance areas such as Shangri-La and Arcadia, are ready to welcome tens of thousands of people each night. 

The Block 9 dance area opened four hours later than scheduled on Wednesday and was fenced off for much of the day with signs reminding people to wear protective clothing. 

Meanwhile the Shangri-La zone - combining art, music and, for the first time, a women-only Sisterhood area - was undergoing late tweaks as festival bosses strived to get it ready on time.

So far the weather has lived up to the forecast, with the sun bursting through the clouds in the early afternoon for some of the first acts of the festival, only to be replaced by heavy rain as the afternoon wore on.

Revellers have used everything from pac-a-macs and ponchos to wooden signs and picnic tables to stay dry, while others have piled into tented stages to keep out of the rain.

Earlier punters raced to the Pyramid Stage at 11am to see the official opening of the 34th festival, which is now 46 years old.

A sombre atmosphere descended on the festival after a night of partying as news filtered through that Britain had voted to leave the EU.

There were no televisions at the site showing the result, but news quickly spread, although Prime Minister David Cameron's resignation was still trickling through as the festival officially opened at 11am.

Scroll down for video 

Glorious: The sun has finally come out over Glastonbury, in time for the crowd to enjoy themselves as Muse gets ready for the stage

Blue skies: Expectant faces in the crowd were all smiles this evening as the doom-laden rain clouds finally vanished over Glastonbury

Celebration: Several revellers got a lift from generous friends so they could get a good view over the thouands-strong crowds to the stage

Drip: Earlier on in the day festival goers had ponchos and umbrellas at the ready as the downpours begin again over the Somerset site

Fashion: Floral pac-a-macs and spotty ponchos are a common sight, as are denim jackets being used as emergency coats

Thumbs up: Fans stay positive but whether they will be able to keep the smiles on their faces if rain continues through to Sunday remains to be seen

Get your groove on: Some punters enjoyed having a dance around in the mud as the rain crashed down around them

Saucy: Others found unusual places to hide from the weather, including this man who took cover under a plastic table

Accident: A pair of wellies have been left behind in the mud, making it look as though a festival goer has had an unfortunate accident

Outfits: Some revellers donned sensible rain coats and boots, while others went for glamorous outfits to pair with their wellingtons

Rocking: Thousands clamber around the Pyramid Stage to get a good view of Two Door Cinema Club during the afternoon



Scope: The sheer size of the crowd outside the Pyramid Stage means some are not going to get the view they were hoping for

Bird's eye view: There are almost 180,000 people at the festival this year with tents stretching across the huge Worthy Farm

On Saturday, forecasters say Glastonbury will witness a mix of sunshine and showers, with the chance of some heavy rain and thunder as the day goes on.

This should clear towards the evening to reveal drier weather, with temperatures around 18C. There will be showers in London and highs of 20C.

Emma Sharples from the Met Office said: 'Showers will fade in the west overnight but will continue in London. Both areas should be dry by Sunday morning.

'There will be sunny spells in London, and cloud in the west which will thicken. 

'There will be patchy rain in the afternoon which will come through at around 2pm. Rain will reach London around 5pm or 6pm.' Temperatures will reach 20C.

The weekend's wet weather will linger for Wimbledon's first-round matches on Monday, with a mix of showers and sunshine expected.

Miss Sharples warned: 'In general there will be flip-flopping; some sunshine with a risk of showers. There will be lots of changing around.

'There will be showers in the south-east on Sunday evening, and the dregs of that will clear on Monday. It should be mostly dry with a bit of sunshine in the afternoon.'

Egoin installs 'collective custom build' property in Edinburgh

Cruel moment man dumps his dog at the roadside before driving off

Police chief speculates there may not have been a drone at all

Teenage Meghan put on scene-stealing performance at Christmas show

Bye Felicia! Hair-larious argument over bus seating arrangements

Chris Evans thanks fans after final BBC Radio 2 breakfast show

Witness recalls moment teenage driver ran down man lying on road

Horrifying CCTV shows hit and run driver plough into young men

Hundreds of people flee amid fears 34-storey building will collapse

Shocking moment out-of-control snow plough hits woman in Russia

Last minute Christmas shoppers queue to park outside supermarket

Dramatic aerial footage of the Krakatoa eruption in Indonesia

Careful: A brave reveller climbs to sit up on a security fence as a member of the festival safety team watches on from below him

Aerial view: The festival goer waves a long strip of rainbow ribbon as he watched the band Foals perform on the Pyramid stage

Treacherous: Revellers struggle to make their way across the boggy terrain with some destined to slip and fall into the mud

Star: Jess Glynne looked glamorous in a green metallic trouser suit and a black cropped top with flowing red hair and sunglasses

Cramped: Any kind of cover is welcome for this group of fans, who have piled underneath a canopy to avoid downpours

Cool: Torrential rain is not enough to stop one woman donning her sunglasses, with these ladies combining hoods and an umbrella to stay dry

Happy days: It has been impossible to shake the smiles off some of the revellers' faces no matter what the weather throws out

Pitter-patter: Mud splashes up all around a group of festival-goers as heavy showers, which will continue into Saturday

Mixed emotions: Some looked thoroughly put off by the weather, left, while others made the best of a bad situation

Shutdown: The mud also caused major problems early on as the opening of the Other Stage was delayed by 45 minutes as extra woodchips were laid down

Celebrities: Model Lily Donaldson shows off her long legs in denim shorts and Jude Law's son Rafferty grabs a snack during the festival

Smiling: Two festival goers take a moment to rest  in the mud while a group celebrates the rain in practical waterproofs in the background

Temperatures will continue in the high teens with wet weather becoming settled on Thursday, making way for drier spells in the days after that.

No flood warnings have been issued for this weekend. 



Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn was due to speak at the festival's Leftfield zone, but his spokesman said he had pulled out in the wake of the referendum. 

The spokesman said: 'He is focusing on the issues that have come from the momentous decision that the country has taken.' 

Glastonbury Festival tweeted a picture of a poem that has been put on display at Worthy Farm in the wake of the referendum result.

Organisers Michael and Emily Eavis were both supporters of the Remain campaign.

'It's a day none of us have felt less British,' the poem states, adding: 'I think we're pretty safe in the knowledge that it's nobody's here fault.'

It ends with the line: 'Goodbye old friend, we'll miss you a lot, our little mate the EU.'

The poem was written by Jodi Ann Bickley, author of One Million Lovely Letters. 

Showtime: Excited fans, pictured, sprinted towards the Pyramid Stage as Glastonbury Festival officially opened at 11am this morning

Colourful: Revellers donned creative costumes ahead of the opening performance by Damon Albarn, right, and the The Orchestra of Syrian Musicians



Protection: Umbrellas were out in force as festival-goers young and old tried to shield themselves from ever darkening skies

Fearless: But others were not as worried about the rain, donning sunglasses and skirts despite the clouds being set to open

Heartbroken: Outspoken Blur frontman Albarn, left, said 'democracy has failed us' after announcing the referendum result to the crowd

Respite: Sunshine burst through the clouds in the afternoon as festival-goers soaked up the rays while watching Skepta on the Pyramid Stage

Egoin installs 'collective custom build' property in Edinburgh

Cruel moment man dumps his dog at the roadside before driving off

Police chief speculates there may not have been a drone at all

Teenage Meghan put on scene-stealing performance at Christmas show

Bye Felicia! Hair-larious argument over bus seating arrangements

Chris Evans thanks fans after final BBC Radio 2 breakfast show

Witness recalls moment teenage driver ran down man lying on road

Horrifying CCTV shows hit and run driver plough into young men

Hundreds of people flee amid fears 34-storey building will collapse

Shocking moment out-of-control snow plough hits woman in Russia

Last minute Christmas shoppers queue to park outside supermarket

Dramatic aerial footage of the Krakatoa eruption in Indonesia

Among festival-goers, there was a feeling of surprise and uncertainty.

Alex Keshavarzi, 26, from Stevenage, and his friend Rachel Hawkins, 25, from Wales, said they were 'devastated' by the result.

Mr Keshavarzi said: 'We were just talking about how uncertain everything is now and how unsafe it has made us feel.

'In 20 years there might be light at the end of the tunnel, we'll see something good out of it. For the time being I can't see it being a good thing.' 

Damon Albarn has told the crowd at Glastonbury Festival that 'democracy has failed us'.

On the morning news came through that the UK had voted to leave the European Union, Blur frontman Albarn spoke out about the referendum result.

Beginning his performance with the Orchestra of Syrian Musicians on the Pyramid Stage, the singer said: 'I have a very heavy heart today, because, to my mind, democracy has failed us.

Swarm: Thousands of people, pictured, gathered in front of the Other Stage to watch indie pop band Blossoms in the sun

What a difference: Hours later crowds donned coats, ponchos and even bin bags as they tried to shelter from the rain

Getting into the spirit: Police officers watching over the festival joined in the fun by wearing fairy wings over their uniforms

Security: Officers are patrolling the site to ensure there is no anti-social behaviour and crack down on drug use

Peace: Punters strike a pose outside the Beat Hotel while dancing the morning away with the weather not dampening the mood

Excitement: Fans struggle to keep a straight face as they wait at the Pyramid Stage for the festival to officially begin

Green: Environmentally-friendly folk have always been attracted to Glastonbury, including a man who used facepaint to resemble the Earth, left, and another who appears to have dressed up as a tree, right

Alternative: Fans don umbrella hats at the Other Stage as they wait for 1990s rockers James to begin their performance

Family: For children at the Glastonbury site, the mud offers an endless playground - particularly if they have all-in-one waterproofs

Beauties: Model Daisy Lowe and TV presenter Laura Whitmore still managed to look stylish despite the mud at the festival on Thursday

Fashionable: Singer Rita Ora is spotted backstage at the music festival, pairing her wellingtons with some glamorous fishnet tights

Stars of the screen: Game of Thrones actress Natalie Dormer (left) and Millie Mackintosh and Hugo Taylor from Made in Chelsea (right)

Relaxing: Rapper Professor Green (pictured) is risking an accidental encounter with his ex-wife Millie Mackintosh (above) at Glastonbury

Famous: Kelly Osbourne and Luke Worrall (left) hold hands as they walk through the site, and (right) radio presenter Nick Grimshaw

'Democracy has failed us because it was ill-informed.

'And I just want all of you to know that when you leave here, we can change that decision. It is possible.'

As music kicked off across the festival site, Albarn told the crowd: 'So here we are, Friday. Reasons to be cheerful: It's not raining.'

But a light drizzle began shortly afterwards and further rain is forecast to hit on Friday afternoon.

The orchestra first performed with Albarn in 2008 and appeared on the album White Flag by his group Gorillaz.

As Syria was torn apart by a civil war, Albarn has sought to reunite the orchestra and chorus for a series of concerts. Many are now refugees.

Albarn said: 'It's been a miraculous journey but we have somehow managed to gather some extraordinary musicians from the pan-Arabic world.

Get the party started: Entertainment is well under way at the Pyramid Stage and will conclude with a performance from Muse tonight 

Flying high: As usual, a variety of flags are being flown above the crowds which help some people find their friends but obscure the view for others

Tribute: A huge puppet of the late David Bowie has been spotted around the site as fans pay their respects to the legendary songwriter

Sludge: Although rain has been patchy this morning it has still been enough to make wet ground difficult to cover for revellers

Puddles: Large areas of surface water remain around the site, particularly on pathways near food outlets and shops

Splashing around: Some youngsters don't mind the mud so much, choosing to play around in the sludge while others do their best to avoid it



'Mainly they've come out of Damascus, they've travelled all the way here, from a very different reality.

'One that is very hard for us to really understand. But we've been hanging out for a week, and do you know, the sense of goodwill and positivity that comes out of these people despite what they've been through is truly inspiring.'  







There was plenty of support for the Out campaign at the festival, although even their mood seemed far from triumphant.

Eileen Corder, 57, from Dorset, was happy with the result: 'I think a lot of it is to do with all these immigrants being allowed in, I think that's what swayed most people. But that's what swayed me, anyway. There's too many people coming into this country.' 



Glastonbury has become almost synonymous with rain so it should not put off festival-goers who have paid hundreds of pounds to attend this year's event.

Spotted: The festival has always attracted celebrities, with Fearne Cotton and husband Jesse Wood, pictured, snapped backstage

Morning: Mud and surface water are still dotted around the Glastonbury site as revellers wake up to enjoy the start of the festival proper

Clear-up: Heavy rain has left the site resembling a muddy bog, making recycling volunteers' jobs even harder as they pick-up rubbish

Out: A camper trudges over a muddy EU flag which has been abandoned as the UK votes in favour of leaving the organisation

Muck: Revellers and volunteers alike have left muddy footprints as far as the eye can see over what was once green fields

Egoin installs 'collective custom build' property in Edinburgh

Cruel moment man dumps his dog at the roadside before driving off

Police chief speculates there may not have been a drone at all

Teenage Meghan put on scene-stealing performance at Christmas show

Bye Felicia! Hair-larious argument over bus seating arrangements

Chris Evans thanks fans after final BBC Radio 2 breakfast show

Witness recalls moment teenage driver ran down man lying on road

Horrifying CCTV shows hit and run driver plough into young men

Hundreds of people flee amid fears 34-storey building will collapse

Shocking moment out-of-control snow plough hits woman in Russia

Last minute Christmas shoppers queue to park outside supermarket

Dramatic aerial footage of the Krakatoa eruption in Indonesia

A vast array of big names are performing around the site throughout the day, including Jess Glynne, Bastille, Editors, Disclosure and veterans ZZ Top.

Adele will cap off Saturday night before the festival comes to a close when Coldplay headline the Pyramid Stage for a fourth time on Sunday.



The start of the festival has so far been been blighted by the weather, which caused severe queues on Wednesday morning with 12-hour tailbacks on the country roads close to Worthy Farm. 

Despite the problems, revellers came together to pay a moving tribute to Jo Cox on Thursday.

Singer Billy Bragg led attendees in a solemn version of We Shall Overcome as people spilled around the sides of the packed Park Stage to celebrate her life.

Prepared: The Met Office has forecast more heavy showers for Glastonbury today and tomorrow meaning more mud is likely

Hard work: Despite heavy traffic delays thousands of people are now on site, set up and ready to enjoy their weekend despite the weather

Stocked up: Festival-goers have brought tonnes of food and alcohol onto the site along with their wellies and wet weather gear 

Home comforts: While some opt to 'rough it' in their tents with as little as possible, others have brought cushions and blankets from home

Grim: Volunteers scramble around the mud to clear up rubbish but conditions are only set to get worse with more rain predicted 

He was joined on stage by festival organiser Emily Eavis, carrying her newborn baby, and more than a hundred women from the crowd who wore sashes in the purple, white and green of the Suffragettes.

A minute's silence was then held for the Labour MP, who was murdered on June 16. 

The late David Bowie's life was also celebrated at the unofficial Glastonbowie, a singalong event which attracted thousands of fans - many dressed as the music legend himself.

In front of the Pyramid Stage, which is decorated with an Aladdin Sane lightening bolt in tribute to the late singer, fans gathered to sing Bowie's hits including Starman, Ziggy Stardust and Suffragette City. 

Glastonbury organisers have tried to 'address the balance' of male and female performers this year by increasing the number of women involved.

Emily Eavis, daughter of founder Michael, said they tried to keep things 'equal' when booking acts, with the festival historically male-dominated.

Speaking to Radio One, she said: 'It's almost impossible to make it 50-50, but we're making an effort to book female acts on the same level as men.'

She added: 'To be fair, there's always been a lack of balance in the music industry when it comes to opportunities for female performers, but it is slowly changing and hopefully we're doing our bit to support the new female artists coming through.'

Miss Eavis described Florence and the Machine's performance last year – in which they deputised for Foo Fighters after Dave Grohl broke his leg – as 'one of last year's great moments'.

Only 15 of the festival's 91 headliners since 1970 have been female, although this trend is beginning to change with Beyonce and Florence performing in recent years and Adele headlining the Pyramid Stage on Saturday. 

Safe haven: Parts of the site remain in good condition, with a host of attractions laid on for the 175,000 people attending this year

Twilight: Away from the main, muddy festival site there are other more peaceful areas including Shangri-La and the Green Fields

Selfie: Trendy revellers pose for a picture at sunset last night as festival-goers enjoy the respite from the downpours

Stand-out: Futuristic outfits and facial accessories are all the rage at festivals throughout the UK and Glastonbury is no different

Shine: Shorts and wellies are the fashion option of choice at Glastonbury as temperatures remain warm but the mud keep rising 



