Referendum horror as man is stabbed and collapses in a bloody heap outside polling station in Huddersfield 

2016-6-23

A polling station in Huddersfield was forced to close today after a man was stabbed and collapsed in a bloody heap directly outside it. 

Police swarmed the area after receiving reports a man had been attacked at 5.15pm this evening. 

The attack happened in front of the polling station in Waverley Road, Huddersfield.

West Yorkshire Police said the victim suffered serious, but not life-threatening, injuries.

A polling station in Huddersfield was temporarily closed after a man was stabbed directly in front of it

A force spokesman said the polling station was closed for half an hour to contain the crime scene but the stabbing was not linked to the EU referendum.  

It is believed up to five young men were involved in the attack and split up and sprinted off in different directions afterwards. 





A 19-year-old man has been arrested in connection with the incident.



Anieq Riaz, 24, was helping to renovate a nearby property when he saw a group of five teenagers walking down the street.

Seconds later, there was shouting that someone had been stabbed.

He told the Huddersfield Examiner: 'He was a young man, around 18, and he collapsed with a wound in his back. We applied some pressure onto his wound as there was a lot of blood. 

'We just wanted to make sure the lad was OK. I have never seen something like that, it was unreal.' 



The police spokesman said: 'This incident is not linked to the European referendum. It is believed the incident took place in Greenhead Park and the victim has then walked to the Waverley Road area.

'The polling station was closed for half-an-hour to contain a crime scene but is now open again.'



Kirklees Council said voters could now return to the polling station.

In a tweet, the council said: 'The polling station at Waverley Road, Hudds, has now reopened. Anyone who could not vote in the 30 minute closure can return up to 10pm.'

Police are appealing for anyone who has information about the incident to contact police on 101 quoting log 1338 of Thursday 23 June. 



 

