Trident vote may be held this summer: Government whips keen to hold vote before summer recess to divert attention from any Tory acrimony over the referendum 

2016-6-17

Ministers are plotting a vote on Trident before the summer recess to try and heal splits in the Tory party after the EU referendum.

Government whips are keen for a vote on Britain’s nuclear deterrent during the week before the House of Commons breaks up for the summer, on 21 July.

The vote would also shift attention away from Tory acrimony to disunity in the Labour party over the renewal of Trident.

The government is planning to vote on the replacement for Trident, pictured an artist's impression, before the summer parliamentary recess to reunite the Tory party which is badly split over the Brexit referendum 

The Labour Party is badly divided over the need to replace Trident, pictured, with a new class of submarine

Conservative MPs have been split over the EU referendum, with many backbenchers dismayed at the audacity of David Cameron and George Osborne in using the machinery of Whitehall to make the case for Remain.

Now whips hope that a vote on the nuclear deterrent will rally Tory MPs behind the government.

One senior source said: ‘They know full well that Trident is more a dividing issue for Labour than it is for the Conservatives. This will put the focus back onto splits between Jeremy Corbyn and his backbenchers.’

The Labour leader is vehemently opposed to the renewal of Britain’s nuclear deterrent.

But unions and many Labour MPs support it because of the jobs it creates and the safety and diplomatic clout it offers Britain.

Emily Thornberry, the shadow defence secretary, has been asked by Mr Corbyn to lead a review of the party’s policy which is currently in favour of Trident.

Miss Thornberry opposes the renewal of Trident and is due to report back later this month.

Mr Corbyn will be forced to give his MPs a free vote to head off a massive rebellion against his leadership.

Downing Street sources said no final decisions had been taken on the timing of the Trident vote.

A vote on Trident would offer an opportunity to exploit Labour divisions and unify the Tory party post-Brexit.

Sir Lynton Crosby, the Tory’s election mastermind, told a Westminster gathering this week that party unity was even more important than the outcome of the referendum.

‘Whatever the outcome of next week's ballot, nothing is more important than the Conservative party.'

The party had to 'unite to govern responsibly' he told the Policy Exchange think tank.

He said it was a 'great party' full of members with 'different views' but it was 'built on the right values' and acted as a 'bulwark against the damage that Jeremy Corbyn and Labour would render' on the country.

'Whatever the result next Thursday, the party must go forward in that united spirit.

'It is its duty to do so in the interests of Great Britain'.

The contentious Chilcot report will also be published in July and the Government is understood to want to make a final decision on another airport runway. 



