Nigel Farage in racism storm over Brexit poster showing thousands of male refugees and warning country is at 'breaking point'

2016-6-16

Nigel Farage was branded 'fundamentally racist' today after he unveiled a Brexit poster showing thousands of male refugees flooding into Europe. 

Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon said his latest poster is 'disgusting' while Tory Treasury minister Harriet Baldwin hit out at the Ukip leader for 'vile xenophobia'.

MPs from all main Westminster parties hit out at the ad minutes after it was unveiled by Mr Farage in Westminster this morning.   

The poster uses a picture of Syrian refugees being escorted along the Slovenian border during the migrant crisis last October and tells voters the EU is at 'breaking point, adding: 'The EU has failed us all. We must break free of the EU and take control of our borders.'



Ukip leader Nigel Farage unveiled the controversial poster in Westminster this morning but was immediately condemned by MPs from all main Westminster parties

Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon said on Twitter that Nigel Farage's latest poster is 'disgusting'

It is expected to be the largest advertising campaign of the referendum so far and will be rolled out across the country today.

Defending his poster amid attacks from all sides of the political spectrum, Mr Farage claimed 'all' the people pictured in the poster will have EU passports within years.  



'This is a statement about the whole of the European Union and politically I really do think that the European Union is at breaking point,' he told the BBC as he unveiled the poster in Westminster. 

'That is why you are seeing new parties emerging and new change happening. And I have to say something - every one of these can get to Calais. 

'We know how bad our government is at defending our borders, and within a few years all of these people will have EU passports. We are much less safe as part of this European Union.' 

But Tory, Labour, Lib Dem and Green MPs united to condemn the poster this morning, accusing Mr Farage of 'exploiting the misery of the Syrian refugee crisis in the most dishonest and immoral way'. 



The poster (pictured being driven around Westminster this morning, is expected to be the largest advertising campaign of the referendum so far and will be rolled out across the country today

Tory MP Neil Carmichael, who is campaigning for Britain to stay in the EU, said: 'It's disappointing to see Ukip jumping on the refugee crisis to further their own political aims.

'Britain can only deal with the issue of immigration by working together with European countries that face the same challenges. 

'Distasteful propaganda like this can only make our immigration challenges worse, not better, and damage community cohesion in Britain.' 

Labour's Yvette Cooper said the poster was irresponsible and said all European countries had a moral duty to help with the migration crisis. 

'Ripping up cooperation with the EU would make it much harder to stop the people smugglers, help refugees or prevent illegal migration,' she said. 'No country can cope with something like this alone.' 

Attacking Mr Farage, Ms Cooper said: 'Just when you thought leave campaigners couldn't stoop any lower, they are now exploiting the misery of the Syrian refugee crisis in the most dishonest and immoral way. 

'Europe didn't cause the Syrian refugee crisis and pulling out of the EU won't stop people fleeing conflict and persecution by ISIS and the Assad regime.' 



The picture used by Ukip in its latest Brexit poster is from a photo taken from the Slovenian border in October



Labour MP Paula Sherriff and SNP MP John Nicolson both hit out at Nigel Farage's latest poster today 

Meanwhile a rival campaign poster supporting Britain staying in the EU mocked up Nigel Farage as a government minister and warned: 'Don't wake up with Nigel next Friday'. 

It echoed Conservative party election posters used in last year's General Election warning. 

With just a week until voters finally have their say in the referendum, another poll showed Brexit ahead this morning. 

The Ipsos Mori survey put the Leave campaign six points ahead of the Remain camp and matched a string of polls over the past week to have shown big leads for Leave.

The details of today's opinion poll made grim reading for the Remain campaign.

Fewer than one in five people believe the main Treasury campaign claim that households would be £4,300 after a Brexit vote.

By contrast, almost half of people do believe the controversial Leave campaign figure that Britain would get back control of £350million a week after Brexit.

Today's poster signals another high profile intervention from Mr Farage after he was caught up in an extraordinary clash with Sir Bob Geldof on the Thames yesterday.

In the most bizarre scenes of the EU referendum so far, the Ukip leader took to the waves with dozens of fishing boats as he urged a vote to cut ties with Brussels next week.

But they were greeted by boats carrying Remain supporters including the rock star, and loud speakers blasting out the song 'In With the In Crowd'.

Nigel Farage unveils his latest Brexit poster in Westminster but MPs from all main Westminster parties immediately condemned it 

Scottish First Minister Nicola Sturgeon (right) said Nigel Farage's latest poster is 'disgusting' 

A rival campaign poster supporting Britain staying in the EU mocked up Nigel Farage as a government minister and warned: 'Don't wake up with Nigel next Friday' 

The fleets chased each other along the river for several hours - while at one point hoses were deployed by the trawlers to try to settle the argument. 

Speaking after the PR stunt, Mr Farage hinted he could quit politics if the country backs Brexit next week - although he refused to rule out taking a seat in the Lords.

The Ukip leader said that despite the encouraging polls, the Leave camp were 'a very long way' from winning the referendum on June 23.

Asked about his plans after the vote, he said: 'I might go and get a real job, you never know.'

Mr Farage, speaking to reporters on a boat on the Thames as part of the Fishing for Leave flotilla, said: 'I haven't thought about it. Everything in my career in politics has been about next Thursday, everything.'

Mr Farage has curtailed his drinking, although he smoked cigarettes during the voyage on the Thames yesterday and joked: 'I think the doctors have got it wrong about smoking.'

Asked whether he would serve in a post-Brexit government with Boris Johnson in charge, he said: 'I want to win next Thursday. God knows what comes afterwards, who know what happens to the Tory party afterwards?

'Who knows what happens to the Labour Party afterwards, to Ukip?'

Asked whether he would rule out taking a seat in the Lords, he said: 'I wouldn't rule in or rule out anything after next Thursday, including quitting politics altogether.' 





Boris Johnson today denied he was bidding to become Prime Minister in the aftermath of the referendum as another poll showed Vote Leave was six points clear.

With just one week until the historic referendum finally takes place, the latest survey matched a string of polls over the past week to have shown big leads for Leave.

Despite the Remain campaign scrambling to halt an apparent slide in support, the new snapshot of public opinion by Ipsos-Mori indicated the momentum continued to be with Brexit supporters.

On a visit to a fish firm in Lowestoft, Suffolk, the ex-mayor of London gutted a fish for the cameras before dismissing suggestions he could be in No 10 within weeks.

The latest row came as another poll showed Brexit six points ahead with just one week to go until the June 23 referendum

Boris Johnson went in search of inspiration today as he was told he should be prime minister on a campaign visit to a fish firm in Suffolk today 

David Cameron - due to campaign in Gibraltar today - is widely expected to announce his resignation if today's poll for the Evening Standard is borne out at the ballot box

On his visit, Mr Johnson declared 'they're pinching our fish' as he posed for photos while holding a live lobster, before then attempting to fillet a salmon.

Speaking at the Sam Cole Food Group to people involved in the fishing industry, Mr Johnson said he is campaigning for Britain to 'take back control' of its waters and ensure North Sea fish is more fairly distributed.

The former London mayor said: 'We think we'd get more boats coming to Lowestoft.'

He added: 'We hope that carries your core support.'

John Knights, who has a fishing boat in Lowestoft docks, said: 'As long as you end up prime minister.'

But Mr Johnson replied: 'No, that's not going to happen.'

Speaking after Mr Johnson's visit, Mr Knights added: 'I'm really worried about this country.'

Asked if he hopes Mr Johnson would be PM if the UK leaves the EU, Mr Knights replied: 'Yeah I do. That man in charge - he's got a pair of balls.

'I don't think he knows much about the (fishing) job, but I believe he really does care about Britain and I believe the man has got some guts to run this country - not just the fishing.

'This country is getting in a mess.'

Mr Johnson grappled with a live lobster on his visit to the fish factory to make a rallying cry to protect the fishing industry by voting for Brexit next week

Mr Johnson, who was joined by Conservative ministers Penny Mordaunt and George Eustice, was also presented with a 'Save Our Soles' T-shirt.

He joked: 'You've got to make sure you don't say that too fast.'

The T-shirt also says: 'EU destroyed our fishing industry - vote leave.'

The details of today's opinion poll made grim reading for the Remain campaign.

Fewer than one in five people believe the main Treasury campaign claim that households would be £4,300 after a Brexit vote.

By contrast, almost half of people do believe the controversial Leave campaign figure that Britain would get back control of £350million a week after Brexit.

Both numbers have been dismissed by independent experts but the gulf in trust between the two campaigns will send new shudders through the Remain camp. 



In other findings, Ipsos-Mori found more people think they would be better off in five years after Brexit than if Britain stays in.

Immigration is now the most important issue to voters seven days out - a sharp turn around from earlier in the campaign when the economy dominated. 

 

