Michael Gove hints he could QUIT the government if we don't vote for Brexit in the EU referendum 

2016-6-21

Michael Gove has hinted that he will quit government if voters do not back Brexit in the EU referendum this week.

The Justice Secretary, one of the leading Leave campaigners, said he would 'reflect' on the result before deciding his future.

The prospect of the Cabinet minister voluntarily departing was raised as he again attacked David Cameron over his failure to curb immigration.

Mr Gove, a close friend of the Prime Minister, argued that cutting ties with Brussels was the only way of regaining control over our borders. 

Michael Gove gave a broad hint during an interview today that a Remain vote on Thursday would mean he leaves government



But he also rejected criticism that the Tories manifesto for the general election had been a 'lie' amid claims David Cameron was told by civil servants four years ago that a key immigration pledge could not be met within the bloc.

Asked about his future during an interview on BBC Radio 4's Today programme, Mr Gove said: 'I will do exactly as the Prime Minister asks me.

'I want people to concentrate not on my job but on their jobs. Of course, depending on what the result is on Friday, I will reflect and I will decide what is the best course for me.'

Mr Gove also suggested the Conservative manifesto pledge to cut net migration to the tens of thousands was undermining trust in politics.

He said he had stood by the plan because he hoped the Prime Minister would have been able to secure a deal with the EU on free movement that made it achievable.

He said: 'Making promises and then saddling yourself with a political system and a political union that means that you cannot deliver those promises, I fear, doesn't contribute to an atmosphere of trust and confidence in politics.'

Former Downing Street policy guru Steve Hilton has claimed officials told Mr Cameron four years ago that his immigration target was 'impossible' while Britain is in the EU.

The civil servants said 'directly and explicitly' that the net migration goal was not deliverable given EU freedom of movement rules.

Despite this, the Prime Minister has repeatedly restated his ambition to hit the target – even including it in his 2015 general election manifesto. At no stage has he succeeded in cutting net migration to below 100,000.

Mr Cameron denied the claims today and insisted that when Mr Hilton left government in 2012 immigration was falling and was close to the target. 

Writing in today's Daily Mail, Mr Hilton recalls the warning to Mr Cameron, saying: 'We were told, directly and explicitly, that it was impossible for the Government to meet its immigration target as long as we remained members of the EU, which of course insists on the free movement of people within it.' 

But Mr Cameron told ITV this morning: 'It's simply not right. Actually when Steve Hilton left Downing Street in 2012, net immigration had actually fallen quite substantially and it got down to 154,000, so not far away from the ambition that I set. 

Mr Gove denied the claims meant the Tory manifesto had been a 'lie'.

'I believed and hoped that we would be able to secure a deal with Europe which would enable us to amend free movement,' he said.

He said he had 'consistently argued' that the UK needed to change its relationship with the European Union.

He said: 'I have specifically argued that we need to change our relationship with the European Union by fundamentally reforming not just our relationship but the European Union itself.

'During the renegotiation I hoped and prayed that the Prime Minister would be able to bring about that change.

'He wasn't and I don't blame him - I do blame the other countries of Europe.' 

Mr Cameron tried to move on from the row over immigration levels today by delivering a plea to older voters in Downing Street.

The PM admitted he had made mistakes in government - but urged people not to punish him by sending Britain out of the EU. He said the economic case for staying in was 'paramount'.

Boris Johnson today said he would apologise publicly if Brexit caused a recession but insisted Britain had nothing to fear from quitting the EU.

David Cameron pleaded with voters not to punish him for mistakes in government by sending Britain crashing out of the EU

The ex-London Mayor has rejected an economic consensus which has strongly warned against voting for Brexit on Thursday.

Mr Cameron and George Osborne made the extraordinary claim in the middle of the campaign that Britain would be voting for a 'DIY recession' if it backed Brexit.

Treasury forecasts suggest anything from a mild to a severe recession is possible after a Brexit vote - but found now evidence for the possibility Brexit would provoke growth because of the uncertainty it would cause.

Mr Johnson was challenged today during a live radio interview on whether he would be 'humble' enough to apologise if he won the referendum but proved to be wrong about the economy.

Answering questions on LBC, the Vote Leave champion said: 'Of course I will.'

He added: 'This is far more important any individual political career or politician. I don't think that London has anything to fear from coming out of the EU, this is the most extraordinary economy, and nor does Britain.

'Britain is the fifth biggest economy in the world, we have the opportunity to do new trade deals.

'When has our country ever gone wrong in believing in ourselves or our democratic institutions?'

Pressed again on an apology, Mr Johnson said: 'I've always been pretty humble about everything.

'I think the current gloom is actually being induced by Project Fear and the nonsense coming from the Remain campaign - I think they are talking the country down.'

