'I consoled him on the defeat in the referendum': Malcolm Turnbull reveals he called David Cameron ahead of Prime Minister's resignation after Britain votes for Brexit

2016-6-24

As Britain's shock decision to leave the EU shakes the world, Malcolm Turnbull and Bill Shorten have turned to voters to choose their respective parties to steer Australia through the resulting volatility.

The Prime Minister and Coalition leader, Malcolm Turnbull, was quick to urge voters to choose stability as he sought to weave Britain's exit from the European Union into the federal election campaign.

Mr Turnbull told ABC TV's 7.30 program that Australia's economy and financial markets were sound and added that the 'leave' vote would not hurt Australia's ties with either the UK or Europe.  



The Prime Minister said he had 'consoled' David Cameron before the UK leader announced his resignation and said he was sorry to him resign. 

Malcolm Turnbull said he had 'consoled' David Cameron (pictured) before the UK leader announced his resignation



Mr Turnbull declined to discuss the details of his conversation with the UK leader but said he respected the decision of the British people.  

'Naturally, I consoled him on the defeat in the referendum and we discussed his next steps and what he announced did not come as any surprise,' Mr Turnbull told host Leigh Sales. 



Laurie Oakes, Political Editor for Channel Nine, said the 'leave' decision would 'most certainly help Malcolm Turnbull and the Coalition in the final week of the campaign.' 

Speaking to Nine News, Mr Oakes said during time of instability voters were 'likely to turn to the incumbent government' meaning the Brexit vote will most certainly help Malcolm Turnbull during his campaign's final week.

The political editor added that the 'leave' decision will also push other issues aside, leaving the topic of the economy at centre stage in the election, where Malcolm Turnbull wants it.

48 per cent of Britain voted to stay in the EU while 52 per cent voted to leave. 

Bill Shorten (pictured) said Australia could withstand any fallout from Brexit, noting Labors previous economic achievements, in particular when the Rudd government saw the nation through the global financial crisis

The Prime Minister was quick to capitalise the referendum result on Friday: We need a strong, majority, Coalition government to deliver Australians the economic leadership they need and they deserve, in these times of opportunity and of risk'

The Prime Minister was quick to capitalise the referendum result on Friday, speaking to reporters in Devonport, Tasmania.

'Australians, I recognise, will be concerned by the uncertainty and instability in global markets, falls in currencies, including the Australian dollar and in equity markets,' Mr Turnbull said.

'It is important to remember that the Australian economy is strong and resilient, and has weathered global shocks before and weathered them well.

'Above all we need stability. We need a strong, majority, Coalition government to deliver Australians the economic leadership they need and they deserve, in these times of opportunity and of risk.' 

Both the Prime Minister and Opposition Leader have said previously that the UK should remain in the EU.

Labor leader Bill Shorten acknowledged short term volatility in the Australian economy, but played down the Brexit impact on Australia

The Prime Minister said he had 'consoled' David Cameron before the UK leader announced his resignation and said he was sorry to him resign

 Labor leader Bill Shorten acknowledged short term volatility in the Australian economy, but played down the Brexit impact on Australia.

Bill Shorten said Australia could withstand any fallout from Brexit, noting Labors previous economic achievements, in particular when the Rudd government saw the nation through the global financial crisis.

Mr Shorten said that proposed budget repair measures such as negative gearing reform would help Australia's response to the market volatility.

'The fundamentals of the Australian economy are solid,' he told reporters.

'Share markets go up and down all the time. That's not an argument to not change a government. The argument about changing the government goes down to the economic fundamentals and the economic plan,' he said.

'We cope with international events all the time.'



