Vote Remain storms to shock three-point lead in last-minute surge: Poll reveals dramatic turnaround as EU vote looms 

2016-6-18

The Remain camp has surged into a three-point lead in the EU referendum campaign in the aftermath of the death of Jo Cox.

A Mail on Sunday poll by Survation shows David Cameron’s Remain campaign on 45 per cent support, with Boris Johnson’s Leave on 42.

It reflects a dramatic six-point turnaround since a similar Survation poll on Thursday, hours before the Labour MP was killed. The new telephone poll was conducted on Friday and Saturday as the nation mourned Mrs Cox.

The Remain vote has surged ahead of Brexit since Thursday's murder of Jo Cox in West Yorkshire 

Murdered MP Jo Cox, pictured, was a strong supporter for Remain and campaigned for Syrian refugees

Only 10 per cent of voters think Nigel Farage has had a good campaign while 43 per cent think this poster depicting migrants was inflammatory with less than a third thinking it was fair 

In addition to her prominent campaign for Syrian refugees, Mrs Cox was a leading Remain supporter.

The six-point switch confirms claims by some commentators that voters could take a more ‘risk-averse’ approach to leaving the EU so soon after Mrs Cox’s shocking death.

Survation’s Thursday poll showed Leave on 45 and Remain on 42, the exact reverse of today’s figures. The number of undecided – 13 per cent – has stayed the same. If undecided voters are excluded, the poll produces a 52-48 per cent majority in favour of staying in the EU.

And the gap could get bigger: 46 per cent say Remain are likely to benefit from any additional late surge, with 33 per cent forecasting a late swing to Leave.

A win for Remain is forecast by 40 per cent, with 26 per cent predicting victory for Leave. Mr Cameron tops the table for best campaign with 17 per cent, ahead of Boris Johnson on 15, Nigel Farage ten, Michael Gove nine and George Osborne two.

Those polled thought Prime Minister David Cameron has had the best referendum campaign so far

However, voters disapproved of Mr Farage’s controversial ‘Breaking Point’ migrant queue poster – 43 per cent said it was inflammatory while 28 per cent said it was fair.

Nearly a third (31 per cent) said Mr Cameron’s Remain side had conducted the most responsible campaign, with 27 per cent favouring Leave, while an overwhelming seven out of ten said MPs must tone down their verbal attacks on each other.

Britain’s top pollster, Professor John Curtice of Strathclyde University, said: ‘After a week in which many polls suggested Leave had leapt into the lead, today’s poll will come as a relief to the Remain camp. Mr Cameron will hope the tide has begun to turn.’ However, he added that it was ‘far from clear’ if the turnaround was the result of criticism of the Leave campaign following Mrs Cox’s death.

