Illegal immigrants aiming to cross the Channel say Brexit will make it EASIER to sneak into Britain because France will no longer try to stop them 

2016-6-24

Migrants living in the jungle refugee camp in Paris have praised the Brexit vote claiming French authorities will no longer block their passage to Britain. 

French politicians reacted angrily to the referendum result, with the Mayor of Calais seeking the removal of the controversial refugee camp claiming the British government should deal with the situation. 

Asylum seekers make nightly attempts to sneak on board trucks looking to cross the Channel, but are often intercepted by French police. 

Migrants living in the Jungle Camp in Calais believe Brexit will make it easier to sneak into the UK 

French politicians want to abandon an agreement where UK border checks are carried out in Calais 

One Afghan asylum seeker told the Mirror: 'Everything is very tough now, they don’t let people go to the UK. But if the UK is out of the EU, France is going to say, "Bye bye, you are out, now take your refugees".'

Currently border checks are conducted on the French side of the Channel with many migrants living in the infamous Jungle camp.

But now the the understanding, known as the Touquet agreement, between France and the UK has been called into question following Britain's vote to leave the European Union.

And mayor of Calais Natacha Bouchart says she will be pressing for the agreement to be suspended.

She told French broadcaster BFM TV: 'The British must take on the consequences of their choice.

Mayor of Calais Natacha Bouchart, who says migrant camps in the French port town should to be moved to Britain after a vote in favour of Brexit

'We are in a strong position to push, to press this request for a review and we are asking the President to bring his weight (to the issue).

'We must put everything on the table and there must be an element of division, of sharing.'

This echoed calls from Xavier Bertrand, the centre-right president of the Hauts-de-France region, who tweeted: 'The English wanted to take back their freedom, they must take back their border.'

Prior to the referendum, a French government minister had warned a vote for Brexit could see migrant camps being moved from Calais to Britain.

Finance minister Emmanuel Macron said in February that the treaty, which was signed in 2003, could be scuppered, telling reporters: 'The day this relationship unravels, migrants will no longer be in Calais.'

There are currently around 7,000 migrants camped in Calais and Dunkirk, many of whom make regular attempts to get into the Channel Tunnel or board a ferry.

Ending the agreement would mean cars and lorries would not be checked for migrants until they reach the British side of the Channel.

However, previously Bernard Cazeneuve, the French Interior Minister, rubbished suggestions the border with Britain could be opened.

'Calling for the border with the English to be opened is not a responsible solution,' Mr Cazeneuve said.

Before the vote, a French government minister had warned Brexit could lead to the camps moving to England

Ending the agreement would mean  vehciles would not be checked for migrants until they reach Dover

There are currently around 7,000 migrants camped in Calais and Dunkirk seeking to sneak into the UK 

'It would send a signal to people smugglers and would lead migrants to flow to Calais in far greater numbers.

'A humanitarian disaster would ensue. It is a foolhardy path, and one the government will not pursue.

'On the contrary, we're going to make the border even more watertight to dissuade smugglers and migrants, respect international rules and reduce the pressure on Calais.'

Britain and France signed the Le Touquet treaty in 2003 amid tensions over the number of people in camps

Britain and France signed the Le Touquet treaty in 2003 amid tensions over the number of people in camps at Calais.

The deal was the latest in a series that allowed Britain to carry out border checks on the French side of the Channel - meaning papers were checked there and vehicles inspected.

British officials are based on the French side of the channel and cooperation around the eurotunnel terminal was stepped up last summer as the numbers trying to break into the tunnel grew.

Scrapping the deal could see British border checks brought back to the English side of the Channel - potentially allowing people to reach the Kent shore to set up camp while awaiting processing.

There are currently around 7,000 people at the camps with 'roads' handed British-styled names such as Queen Elizabeth II Street.

 

