Tory grandees blast 'woeful failure' of Bank Governor Mark Carney to offer a 'fair and balanced' analysis of Brexit  

2016-6-16

The Bank of England moved to the heart of the EU referendum battle today as it was accused of producing 'phoney' forecasts in a bid to avoid Brexit.

Governor Mark Carney was forced to defend his warnings about a possible recession after senior Tories suggested he had breached election rules.

Two former Conservative leaders and two former Chancellors have also attacked the Bank for a 'woeful failure' to present 'fair and balanced analysis'.

Bank of England governor Mark Carney has warned there could be a recession if we vote to leave the EU

The extraordinary row about the behaviour of the independent Bank - which is published its latest assessment of the economy today - came as the struggle over the UK's ties to Brussels enters its last week.

George Osborne faced a vicious backlash from his own party yesterday after he unveiled a post-Brexit 'punishment' Budget that included swingeing tax hikes and slashing public spending.  

Appearing in the Question Time special last night, Justice Secretary Michael Gove added his voice to some 65 Tory MPs who have condemned the dire claims.

He insisted there would be 'no need' for an emergency Budget if we left the EU.

David Cameron met former Top Gear presenters Jeremy Clarkson and James May on the Eu referendum campaign trail today

'I think what we have heard from the Remain campaign throughout this whole referendum has been dire warnings of the terrible consequences of the British people just taking control of their own destinies,' Mr Gove said. 



In a letter to the Daily Telegraph, former chancellors Lord Norman Lamont and Lord Nigel Lawson and ex-party leaders Iain Duncan Smith and Lord Michael Howard poured scorn on warnings of economic disaster from the Remain campaign.

'There has been startling dishonesty in the economic debate, with a woeful failure on the part of the Bank of England, the Treasury and other official sources to present a fair and balanced analysis.

'They have been peddling phoney forecasts and scare stories to back up the attempts of David Cameron and George Osborne to frighten the electorate into voting Remain.'

Bernard Jenkin, Conservative chairman of the Public Administration Committee and a senior figure in Vote Leave, has written to the governor warning him that he is 'prohibited' from speaking out against Brexit. 

Former Tory leader Iain Duncan Smith, left, and ex-Chancellor Norman Lamont have attacked Mr Carney over his interventions during the referendum campaign

Mr Duncan Smith and Lord Lamont wrote a joint letter criticising the Bank with ex-party leader Lord Howard, left, and another former chancellor Lord Lawson

Mr Jenkin said the Bank was covered by the 'purdah' rules which prevent publicly funded bodies making statements in the run-up to elections..

The letter, seen by the BBC, said: 'You have already made your views known about the question of the forthcoming referendum.

'The concern is that you, as Governor of the Bank of England, or others who serve the Bank, may have occasion to make further public comment on matters arising from the question on the ballot paper for the referendum.' 



The Prime Minister leapt to the defence of the Bank of England governor on Twitter this morning

Mr Jenkin went on: 'You are prohibited from making any public comment, or doing anything which could be construed as taking part in the referendum debate,' the letter continues.

'I have taken legal advice from Speakers' Counsel ... (and) wanted to take the opportunity to stress the importance of this matter.

'I very much hope you will avoid doing anything which could suggest you or the Bank have disregarded Parliament's wishes.'

But Mr Carney - whose officials are said to have regarded the letter as a 'threat' - wrote back to Mr Jenkin, insisting he had not 'made my views known' on the referendum.

'Nor do I intend to share my private opinion other than via the anonymity of (the) ballot box when I join millions of others to cast my vote,' the letter says.

'All of the public comments that I, or other Bank officials, have made regarding issues related to the referendum have been limited to factors that affect the Bank's statutory responsibilities and have been entirely consistent with our remits.'

Tory MP Bernard Jenkin 

Mr Carney said that Mr Jenkin's letter 'demonstrates a fundamental misunderstanding of central bank independence' and the Bank had 'a duty' to report 'evidence-based judgements'.

He also said the Bank was not officially covered by the purdah rules but had 'voluntarily' agreed to be bound by them 'in the spirit of the guidelines issued by the Cabinet Office'.

David Cameron, who met former Top Gear presenters Jeremy Clarkson and James May in TV studios in west London as he campaigned today, said the Tories were wrong to question the governor's position.



The Prime Minister tweeted: 'It's deeply concerning that the Leave campaign is criticising the independent Bank of England.

'We should listen to experts when they warn us of the dangers to our economy of leaving the European Union.'

Labour former chancellor Alistair Darling said the Leave campaign was making a 'blatant attempt to muzzle a respected independent voice'. 

'The Bank of England is independent, the Governor is independent and he has a duty to say what he thinks,' Lord Darling said. 

'It is very clear the Leave campaign doesn't want people to hear what the Bank has to say on the most critical issue facing our generation because they don't like its conclusions.' 

The Bank of England is independent from government but is voluntarily following purdah rules

 

 

