Will a referendum washout boost Brexit? Britain's stormy summer soaks voters as they head to the polls today

2016-6-22

Many voters across Britain woke to heavy rain and flash flooding after a night of thunderstorms as they headed to the polls for today's historic EU referendum vote.

The weather is of particular importance with turn out crucial to both sides of the referendum debate, as anything that puts off wavering voters from turning out would be a blow.

Polling data has made clear Leave voters tend to be more determined than Remain voters.

Today's weather: Rain had been forecast in the South East in the morning (left) and afternoon (right). The worst of the weather has been over London - which is expected to be strongly voting to stay inside the EU

Washout: Voters were greeted by a flooded car park at a polling station in Chessington, south London, after heavy overnight rain

Forecasts yesterday put the worst of the weather over London - expected to be strongly voting to stay inside the EU - and that materialised this morning with torrential downpours across the capital.

Wet weather has also been forecast over Scotland and Northern Ireland - both areas expected to endorse continued EU membership. 

Red 'immediate action' flood warnings were issued for parts of south-east London and Essex as parts of London were expected to see a month's rain fall in a matter of hours. 

A chief forecaster at the Met Office said yesterday: 'Increasingly warm and humid air arriving from France later on Wednesday brings with it a risk of thunderstorms.

June has already been soaking wet and forecasters suggest more rain will come tomorrow - including over London, a Remain heartland 

'These thunderstorms are likely to occur in a couple of main waves, from Wednesday late afternoon or early evening into early Thursday and a second wave breaking out later on Thursday.

'Where thunderstorms occur torrential rain and frequent lightning are expected, as well as a chance of some hail. 30 mm or more of rain could fall in an hour and locally in excess of 50 mm is possible in two or three hours.'

Sources at the Remain campaign told MailOnline: 'There are dark clouds on the horizon if Britain votes to Leave the EU but the great British weather is unlikely to have much of an effect on turn out. 

'Brits don’t quit and a bit of rain won’t stop people getting to the polling stations to have their say in this once-in-a-generation decision'

Polling experts yesterday played down the potential impact of poor weather on the result despite turn out being seen as crucial to the final tallies 

Leave insisted to the Telegraph: 'If we vote to leave on Thursday you can be sure the sun will be shining the following day.'

Joe Twyman, head of political and social research at YouGov, said in a recent analysis: 'When it comes to the question of European Union membership, those who wish to leave the EU are more likely to say they will vote than those who wish to stay.

'This means we can conclude, generally speaking at least, that a lower turnout come polling day should favour the Leave campaign.'

Polling expert John Curtice said: 'All the evidence is that weather is irrelevant so unless we have have a major flood or snowstorm somewhere that causes real disruption it is completely irrelevant to turnout.'







