Visa headaches, a plummeting dollar and turmoil for the economy: What the Brexit would mean for Australia

2016-6-23

As Britons and Commonwealth citizens living in the UK head to the polls on June 23 to decide if Britain remains in the European Union, the impacts could be wide-ranging for Australians.

More than 46 million people are reportedly registered to vote in Thursday's plebiscite, which will ask 'Should the United Kingdom remain a member of the European Union or leave the European Union?'

The polls are open until 10pm local time (7am AEST), with the results due early on Friday 24 June. 

Scroll down for video  

Britons and Commonwealth citizens currently living in the UK head to the polls on June 23 to decide if Britain remains in the European Union

British Prime Minister David Cameron (right) and wife Samantha Cameron (left) pictured leaving Methodist Central Hall in Westminster after voting in the referendum

About 113,000 Australians currently living in the UK are eligible to vote in the referendum and Aussies in London organiser Teaghan Searing said they could be leaning towards a Brexit. 

The Facebook page she runs has 33,000 followers and she said a suggestion that a Brexit could lead to closer ties with Commonwealth countries appear to have struck a chord with members.

'Just from the posts and conversations between members there is definitely this belief that leaving will lead to more open borders for Australians to come here,' she said.

'There is this school of thought with some Australians that a vote for Brexit will make it easier in terms of visas and immigration for Commonwealth countries.'

Voters wait for a polling station to open in Saltburn-by-the-Sea, a seaside town in North Yorkshire, England

Ms Searing said even her friends in Australia were saying vote Brexit so they could come to the UK.  

Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull has warned Britain leaving the European Union would be a 'very big shock'.  

'There will be obviously great efforts to ensure that the consequences of that shock are minimised,' he said.

However, Mr Turnbull said the strategic implications would not be as severe - as Britain would not be leaving NATO.

Shadow assistant treasurer Andrew Leigh said a 'Brexit' would lead Britain to look more inward and force it to renegotiate trade agreements with other countries.

'For Australian companies that use Britain as an entry point to the EU it would also generate disruption," Dr Leigh told AAP on Thursday.  

But what kind of impact would Brexit have on Australia?

People pictured queuing outside a polling station in Clapham South, London. More than 46 million people are reportedly registered to vote in Thursday's plebiscite

A polling station outside the Greenwich Heritage Centre in London. The polls are open until 10pm local time (7am AEST), with the results due early on Friday 24 June

 

Visas 

IF BRITAIN LEAVES THE EU 

If Britain separates from the EU an extra visa may be required for Australians, according to tourism expert from the University of Technology Sydney Dr David Bierman, reported The Courier Mail.

Dr Bierman said if Australians travel through Britain they get automatic entrance to all other EU countries, and the same occurs for example if you travel through France and then into the UK.  

'If Brexit does occur, all that will mean is you’ll have a special stamp for coming into the UK and another stamp for EU countries,' Dr Bierman said.

He said it's also possible that fewer Australian travellers would visit the EU and the UK.

Dr Bierman said most Australian travellers tend to base themselves in the UK and travel back and forth to the EU. 

Brexit would make it easier for Australians to live and work in the UK if Britain adopts the Australian points-based system of immigration for European citizens

 

Australians moving to and living in the UK

IF BRITAIN LEAVES THE EU 

Brexit would make it easier for Australians to live and work in the UK if Britain adopts the Australian points-based system of immigration for European citizens.

Australians are currently deported from the UK if they earn below £35,000 ($70,000) a year, as part of the UK government's attempt to curb migrant numbers, reported the Sydney Morning Herald.

Under the Australian system, applicants are required to meet a certain criteria of points relating to age, education, English competency and occupation. 

The proposed change in the UK would mean that many citizens from EU countries such as Romania and Bulgaria would no longer be automatically allowed to live and work in the country. 

Vote Leave campaigners, former London Mayor Boris Johnson and Cabinet Minster Michael Gove, have said if they win the referendum, they plan to introduce the system by the next general election, due in 2020.  



Australians commonly work in the UK as nurses and teachers, earning a median wage of £23.019 ($46,000) which means under the new rules they would be kicked out of the country. 

Under the Brexit plans, migrants coming from the EU to work or study would be assessed on the basis of their skills and admitted only if Britain had identified a shortage in a particular industry.

The new arrivals would also be required to speak a good level of English. 

IF BRITAIN REMAINS IN THE EU

If Britain remains in the EU, Australians living and working in the UK will have to deal with recent tighter restrictions on wages.

They currently have to earn more than £35,000 ($70,000) a year to remain in the UK on a working holiday visa.

Australians staying longer than six months in the UK will also have to continue to pay $400 (200 GBP) for the 'free' National Health Service (NHS), introduced in April this year, reported the ABC.





Under Brexit the Australian dollar could fall 2.5 per cent against the US dollar and rise up to 8.3 per cent against the British Pound



The Brexit is derived from the words 'British' and 'exit' and refers to the possible departure of Britain from the European Union. 

Britons and Commonwealth citizens living in the UK at the time of the vote are being asked the question: 'Should the United Kingdom remain a member of the European Union or leave the European Union?'

Why leave?

The Leave campaign argues that membership in the EU costs the UK billions of pounds that could be spent in the UK. Another key issue is the desire to better control Britain's borders.

Why stay?

It would be harder for Europeans to invest in the UK, more expensive for British companies to borrow and more complicated for companies with operations across the continent. The UK could still negotiate an exit with access to the EU market that doesn't have huge limitations. The uncertainty over would happen next could also hit financial markets hard. 

Source: Business Insider Australia 





Currency and the exchange rate

IF BRITAIN LEAVES THE EU 

According to the Commonwealth Bank's Global Market Research, the British Pound could fall up to ten per cent against the US Dollar.

The Australian dollar could fall 2.5 per cent against the US dollar and rise up to 8.3 per cent against the British Pound.

Australians who are planning a trip to the UK should wait until after the referendum to purchase pounds, but based on the analysis they should purchase US dollars as soon as possible. 

IF BRITAIN REMAINS IN THE EU 

Commonwealth Bank currency strategist Joe Capurso told The Guardian the value of the Australian dollar won't be affected in the long term unless people believe the global economy will be hit significantly by the change.

Mr Capurso said if Britain remains in the EU the Australian dollar could rise about 1-2c on Friday. 





 

Superannuation

IF BRITAIN LEAVES THE EU 

As superannuation is a long-term investment, volatile markets caused by a possible Brexit would mean little in the overall scheme of things, reported The Courier Mail.

Super funds generally invest across shares, property, infrastructure, cash, fixed interest and alternative investments which means one bad asset would not destroy an entire super fund.

If Brexit goes ahead super funds would likely be subdued for several years amid low global growth and low interest rates.

Short-term turmoil in the British or European financial markets would only directly affect a small part of a super fund's assets.  



Short-term turmoil in the British or European financial markets would only directly affect a small part of an Australian super fund's assets

 

Share market and trade

IF BRITAIN LEAVES THE EU 

Financial markets are often spooked by uncertainty and the possibility of Britain leaving the EU would lead to turmoil in the UK and the global financial markets. 

In a worst case scenario it could precipitate another financial crisis, reported The Conversation.

As Australia is closely linked to offshore markets, the turmoil would have a large impact on Australian markets, as they tend to decline as uncertainty increases overseas.

If the markets seize up as they did in 2008, the big Australian banks would find it difficult to secure offshore funding they require, therefore share prices would fall and government guarantees could be required again.

In this scenario, it would be unlikely that Australia would avoid a recession like it did in 2008-2009.

A fall in the pound would also have a negative consequences for Australians who have pensions and other assets in the UK.

A shaky global economy would also impact Australia's trade, with exports a key driver of recent GDP growth, so this could have a severe consequences for employment and economic growth. 

IF BRITAIN REMAINS IN THE EU 

If Britain votes to stay as part of the EU the British pound could jump by as much as six per cent against the Australian dollar, reported Business Insider Australia.

Stocks are reprotedly set to rise rapidly on a Remain vote, with Barclays and Ryanair predicted to be the big winners in the UK, according to research by Macquarie.  



The possibility of Britain leaving the EU would lead to turmoil in the UK and the global financial markets, directly affecting the Australian market

 

Business

IF BRITAIN LEAVES THE EU 

The June 23 vote has many implications for Australian businesses, as the UK is the second largest destination for Australian foreign investment behind the United States, reported the ABC.

Australian companies such as Westfield, AMP and the Future Fund all have major investments in UK assets including shopping centres, utilities and airports.

Many Australian firms also use England as a stepping stone into Europe.

Australian British Chamber of Commerce chief executive David McCredie said if there was a challenge to the connectivity between the UK and the continent and Ireland, then it may challenge that perspective for Australian investors looking at Europe. 

Some Australian companies are reportedly worried that a vote for Britain to leave the EU could make it more difficult for them to trade in Europe as well. 

IF BRITAIN REMAINS IN THE EU

Australian businesses will no doubt breathe a sigh of relief. If Britain remains in the EU in the short-term, a 'relief rally' would likely see global stock markets surge higher along with the British pound (and the Australian dollar) reported The Conversation.









