Now Boris plots to SAVE Dave! Johnson pledges loyalty to Prime Minister even if Britain votes to leave EU as he distances himself from Tory leadership challenge

2016-6-18

Boris Johnson is to publicly disavow any bid to oust David Cameron following Thursday’s referendum.

Mr Johnson and fellow Leave campaigner Michael Gove are to write to the Prime Minister pledging to stay loyal to him even if the referendum results in Brexit.

They intend to release the letter when the polls close at 10pm on Thursday to distance themselves from any attempt by rebel Tory MPs to trigger a leadership challenge against the Prime Minister.

A handful of Conservative MPs have said they are ready to write to party chiefs demanding a contest, though way short of the 50 required to force such a race.

Boris Johnson is to publicly disavow any bid to oust David Cameron following Thursday’s referendum

Mr Johnson, strong favourite to succeed Mr Cameron if he loses the referendum or wins by a small margin, has repeatedly denied trying to use Thursday’s vote to topple the Prime Minister.

The letter is designed to show that even if Britain votes to leave the EU, Mr Johnson and Mr Gove believe Mr Cameron should stay in No 10 to handle the exit talks with the EU and prevent a political crisis in the UK.

The Mail on Sunday understands that the letter, organised by Tory MP Robert Syms, has now been signed by more than 70 Brexit-supporting Tory MPs.

One said last night: ‘David Cameron gave us this referendum and this is to make clear he should stay on after the result is declared.

Mr Johnson and fellow Leave campaigner Michael Gove are to write to the PM pledging to stay loyal to him even if the referendum results in Brexit

‘Nobody in the Tory Party really wants a leadership election and the dangers of instability in the event of a narrow Brexit vote on Thursday are much reduced if the Prime Minister does stay on. 

'He’s also arguably the best person to lead renegotiations with Brussels if the country does vote to quit the EU.’

Mr Cameron said yesterday that, win or lose on Thursday, he plans to stay in Downing Street. 

Asked if could withstand a challenge in the event of an EU defeat, he said: ‘I don’t expect it. All the time I’ve been leader you have this stuff, but it never (happens)… Well, it hasn’t so far.’

In a rallying call to voters to back him on Thursday, Mr Cameron said they should reject ‘three total untruths’ promoted by Mr Johnson and Mr Gove.

‘They have said we give the EU £350 million every week and that we cannot stop Turkey joining or the formation of an EU army. All three are totally untrue.’

However, he also said he was the best person to carry out a post-Brexit negotiation.

That will be fiercely disputed by some anti-EU Tory MPs, who have privately suggested his advocacy of Remain makes Mr Cameron the last person who should lead the bid to carve out a new deal from Brussels.

