Today is OUR D-Day, says Gove: He issues passionate plea not to let down future generations

2016-6-22

Michael Gove today declares that Britain is facing this generation's 'D-Day'– with a choice between becoming a prosperous, sovereign nation once again, or a poorer, less secure one inside the EU.

In the most passionate plea of the campaign, the Justice Secretary urges the public not to 'flinch' or let down future generations whose lives would be diminished by Brussels.

Rejecting the pessimism of the Remain camp, led by David Cameron, he told the Mail: This is D-Day. It's democracy day. It is an opportunity for us to demonstrate a vote of confidence in our country and its ingenuity, its generosity, its tolerance and its potential.

Michael Gove (pictured) has urged the public not to 'flinch' or let down future generations whose lives would be diminished by Brussels

'We have got to have confidence in our institutions. Britain gave the world parliamentary democracy. It gave the world common law traditions, trial by jury and the principle of innocent until proven guilty.

'We gave the world moral leadership in the fight against slavery and the fight against fascism.

'We gave the world the NHS and public service broadcasting and we did all these things as a self-governing democracy.

'So the idea that Britain is a rain soaked little island where we eat too much cake – that is just not right. Voting to leave is a rejection of pessimism and an embrace of optimism.'

Speaking on a final campaign visit to Dorset, Mr Gove said this was Britain's opportunity to 'break free'. He continued: 'If we do not vote to leave tomorrow, then we won't get the chance to escape the EU for another generation and possibly in our lifetime.

'And if we vote to stay, the European elites will take that as a vote of confidence in their leadership and a vote for more Europe.

'More of the same surrender of powers, more of the same lack of control over our money, more of the same lack of democracy.

'I just think it would be difficult to explain to our children and grandchildren that when we had the opportunity to show confidence in our democracy, that we decided to flinch at the last moment.'

Boris Johnson gives a thumbs up as he leaves Selby, North Yorkshire, on a hectic day of campaigning

Mr Johnson has appealed for voters to make the EU referendum Britain's 'Independence Day'

Mr Gove, who confirmed he would be happy to serve in Mr Cameron's Cabinet once the rancorous referendum contest is over, compared the moment Britain stands at in history with the American Revolution.

He said: 'The decision the American Revolutionaries had to make in the 1770s about whether or not to continue to be ruled by someone who was distant and unaccountable, who imposed taxes without listening to their voices or whether to break free.

'They decided to break free then and America has never looked back and the world had cause to be grateful. There will have been all sorts of people then I imagine saying it is a risk, don't go against the Establishment, can you really survive?

'In five years' time, if we stay in the EU, we will be paying more money to bail out a single currency which is failing. We face the prospect of more EU control over our security, our intelligence services having their hands tied.

'We face the prospect of a rogue European Court making it more difficult for us to deal with terrorism. We also face the prospect of our competitiveness diminishing. My fear is that if we vote to stay in, Britain will be poorer, less safe. I also worry that it will feel and be less fair because the elites and the establishment will have felt they had a great escape.

'They will feel that the moment they could have been held to account and we could have taken control has passed.'

David Cameron made his final pitch to voters in Birmingham, appearing with Gordon Brown and leading politicians from across the political spectrum at an end of campaign rally

On an extraordinary final day. Boris Johnson criss-crossed the country by helicopter. He said: 'It's time to speak up for democracy, and hundreds of millions of people around Europe agree with us. It's time to break away from the failing and dysfunctional EU system.'

Last night, the Remain camp released statements from Mr Cameron and Britain's three surviving former prime ministers urging the country to vote In.

Mr Cameron said: 'Today we have assembled the biggest coalition of support in history – from businesses, to trade unions to expert economists and across political parties – for a vote to remain. Quitting Europe is a risk to your family's future because a vote to leave on Thursday means there is no going back on Friday.'

In what was described as an 'unprecedented alliance', the Prime Minister was backed by Tony Blair and Gordon Brown from the Labour side. Mr Blair said: 'Britain faces a historic choice between prosperity, influence and security as part of Europe, or a reckless leap in the dark and years of damaging uncertainty. If we vote to leave, there is no going back. Voting Remain will secure Britain's place as a proud, influential country with a strong economy and a bright future.



Appearing alongside Mr Cameron in Bristol, Sir John Major said the Brexit camp were 'the gravediggers of our prosperity'.

But Defence Minister Penny Mordaunt hit out at the Remain camp for suggesting those voting for Brexit were 'little islanders'. She said: 'It is unfair to tar the millions of people who want to take back control of their laws, their borders and their money with a brush of calling them narrow minded or little islanders or all the other insults thrown at them.

'That is quite wrong. This is an attempt to make people feel guilty about what they know in their hearts and their heads is the right thing for them and their families and it is a sign that they have lost the arguments.'

Gove 'lost it' with Nazi jibe, says Cameron

David Cameron accused Michael Gove of having 'lost it' yesterday after the Justice Secretary compared economists warning against Brexit to Nazi-paid scientists who smeared Albert Einstein.

Mr Gove said: 'We have to be careful about historical comparisons, but Albert Einstein during the 1930s was denounced by the German authorities for being wrong and his theories were denounced and one of the reasons, of course, he was denounced was because he was Jewish.' 

He told LBC radio: 'They got 100 German scientists in the pay of the government to say that he was wrong and Einstein said, 'Look, if I was wrong, one would have been enough'.'

Mr Gove had been trying to highlight the public's dissatisfaction with propaganda unleashed on voters by 'experts' before today's referendum. He later apologised.

David Cameron accused Michael Gove of having 'lost it' yesterday after the Justice Secretary compared economists warning against Brexit to Nazi-paid scientists who smeared Albert Einstein

But the Prime Minister attacked Mr Gove's remarks, telling Sky News: 'To hear the Leave campaign today sort of comparing independent experts and economists to Nazi sympathisers – I think they have rather lost it.

'These people are independent – economists who have won Nobel prizes, business leaders responsible for creating thousands of jobs, institutions that were set up after the war to try to provide independent advice. It is right to listen.'

Mr Gove pointed out that he had refrained from personal attacks, and said: 'I was asked a question by Iain Dale [LBC presenter] about the predictions of doom for the economy. I answered, as I often do, with a historical analogy. It was clumsy and inappropriate.

'Obviously I did not mean to imply anything about the motives of those who have spoken out in favour of staying in the EU.'

He added: 'I'm sorry for speaking so clumsily and apologise for giving offence… I think Britain will be more prosperous if we end our connection to the euro project and I should have answered this question directly.'

Nearly half PM's business advisers refuse to back the EU

Almost half of David Cameron's inner-circle of business advisers and half of Britain's FTSE 100 bosses refused to sign a letter backing Brussels, it emerged yesterday.

In a letter to The Times, orchestrated by Downing Street, some 1,285 business leaders – including 900 small and medium-sized companies and 50 of the FTSE 100 – warned that leaving the EU would 'mean uncertainty for our firms, less trade with Europe and fewer jobs'.

Signatories included Sir Richard Branson, of Virgin, Michael Bloomberg, the American media mogul and former New York mayor, and bosses from Barclays, mining giant Anglo American and housebuilders Barratt Developments and the Berkeley Group.

But bosses of half the FTSE 100 companies – including the supermarket giant Tesco and Britain's biggest bank Lloyds – refused requests from the Remain campaign to put their name to the letter.

And in a bruising setback for Mr Cameron, nine of the 20 members of his Business Advisory Group also declined to put pen to paper.

They include Nigel Wilson, the boss of Britain's biggest pensions and investment firm Legal and General.

An outspoken Eurosceptic, he has previously said Britain would be better off leaving the single market if it fails to negotiate meaningful reform. But he has also stressed the case for Brexit is 'unproven' and that it is up to the public – not company bosses – to decide Britain's future.

Other business advisers to Mr Cameron who did not sign the letter included Robert Noel, the boss of Land Securities, Jeff Fairburn, of housebuilder Persimmon, Liv Garfield, of Severn Trent, and Ana Botin, the chairwoman of Santander.

The remaining bosses who refused to tow the line were Jack Ma, founder and executive chairman of Chinese tech firm Alibaba Group, Steve Varley, of accountant EY, and Steve Wadey, of QinetiQ, the defence technology firm.

 

