A victory for Middle England: The Midlands and the North lead Britain out of Europe as London and Scotland are beaten in Brexit battle

2016-6-24

The English shires and Labour's northern heartlands led Britain out of the European Union in a victory for middle England.

Despite Britain's biggest cities backing a Remain vote at yesterday's historic referendum, the country overall headed for the Brexit door.

The results caused immediate turmoil in the markets as the pound collapsed by more than 10 per cent in the hours after the polls closed and the FTSE-100 braced for heavy losses.

Nigel Farage - who earlier appeared to concede defeat - made a jubilant victory speech at around 4am declaring it was a 'victory for ordinary people'. 

Tory constituencies across the south and midlands voted for Brexit in huge numbers. 

Places such as Wellingborough, West Somerset and Chesterfield all voted for leave by more 60 per cent. 

The referendum map was painted blue for Out across vast swathes of England - despite London and Scotland being bright yellow. 

Mr Farage told a jubilant Leave.EU rally in central London: 'Dare to dream that the dawn is breaking on an independent United Kingdom.

'This, if the predictions now are right, this will be a victory for real people, a victory for ordinary people, a victory for decent people.

'We have fought against the multinationals, we have fought against the big merchant banks, we have fought against big politics, we have fought against lies, corruption and deceit.

'And today honesty, decency and belief in nation, I think now is going to win.

'And we will have done it without having to fight, without a single bullet being fired, we'd have done it by damned hard work on the ground.'

Mr Farage praised Ukip donor Arron Banks along with Labour and Tory MPs and those of 'no party' who have taken part in the Leave campaign.

Nigel Farage tonight declared victory for ordinary people as Middle England led Britain to a Brexit vote in the EU referendum 

He went on: 'And we'll have done it not just for ourselves, we'll have done it for the whole of Europe.

'I hope this victory brings down this failed project and leads us to a Europe of sovereign nation states, trading together, being friends together, cooperating together, and let's get rid of the flag, the anthem, Brussels, and all that has gone wrong.

'Let June 23 go down in our history as our independence day.'

Labour MP John Mann said: 'This is not about Farage, Johnson or any of us politicians. It is about the people wanting to take back power and influence.' 

Work and Pensions Secretary Stephen Crabb said the Government must respond to 'social divisions' which seemed to have pushed many of the 'white working class' to vote Leave.

There were calls within Labour too for a change in direction, with Bassetlaw MP John Mann saying that the strong showing for Brexit in former heartland areas showed the party was 'out of touch' with traditional voters who were 'sick to death' with what they were being offered.

 



