Unlikely alliance between Labour heartlands and Tories in the Home Counties gives a slap in the face to the London political elite 

2016-6-24

From working class estates in Labour heartlands to Tories in the Home Counties, it was an unlikely meeting of minds.

The extraordinary alliance of voters who embraced 'Leave' also included many of the nation's suburbs and vast swathes of agricultural areas in the East of England and West Country.

While motivations may have varied with geography, they had common purpose: to give a firm slap in the face to the London political elite.

The map of results vividly depicts the capital as a small, isolated island of euro-enthusiasm in a sea of blue.

The map of results vividly depicts the capital as a small, isolated island of euro-enthusiasm in a sea of blue

To a greater or lesser extent, almost everywhere else in England and Wales resolved to quit Brussels. Scotland and Northern Ireland, however, both voted to remain. Six years after Gordon Brown infamously dismissed a voter in Rochdale who was concerned about the effects of mass migration as a 'bigoted woman', yesterday the Labour Party could only watch as its supporters defied leader Jeremy Corbyn with Leave votes mounting up in its heartlands.

Across the North in old socialist bastions such as Warrington, Wigan, St Helens, Doncaster and Barnsley, the Leavers were overwhelmingly the winners.

The same groundswell was in evidence in Tyneside too – another former New Labour stronghold.

There were relatively wealthy Newcastle residents opting to remain but their poorer neighbours in Gateshead, Sunderland, Consett and South Shields were choosing to quit.

In Labour-dominated Merseyside, while voters in Liverpool city centre stayed loyal to the official party line and backed Remain, the less affluent suburbs opted to leave.

The biggest punches were dealt by voters in the Midlands, Eastern England, Lincolnshire and Humberside, especially in areas where Eastern European immigration has been a huge concern.

The greatest support for Brexit was in Boston, Lincolnshire – home to a higher proportion of Eastern European migrants than anywhere else in England and Wales – which polled 75.6 per cent of votes to leave the European Union.

Nearby South Holland was second, on 73.6 per cent, while Thurrock in Essex, recorded 72.3 per cent and Great Yarmouth in Norfolk had 71.5 per cent.

Yet overall, evidence suggests immigration was not in fact the chief reason why leavers decided it was time to quit.

To a greater or lesser extent, almost everywhere else in England and Wales resolved to quit Brussels

Yesterday's Referendum special after news of the incredible result came through 

– questioning 12,369 people on Referendum Day after they had voted – revealed the number one motivation to leave the EU was concerns over sovereignty, with migrants coming second. Asked why they had voted Out, almost half of leavers (49 per cent) said the biggest single reason was 'the principle that decisions about the UK should be taken in the UK'.

A further 33 per cent cited regaining control over immigration and borders as the biggest reason. The third largest factor was feeling powerless to stop the EU expanding its membership or powers.

By contrast, those who voted to stay in the EU did so for entirely different reasons, the research found, suggesting the two sides were never really engaging with each other's arguments.

The biggest factors for the remainers were the risks to the economy, jobs and prices.

Second on the list was access to the single market, and third was a feeling of isolation.

In all of these breakdowns, the priorities were the same for Conservative and Labour voters.

The analysis also shows that the Leave camp won over voters on the key battlegrounds of the NHS, border controls, protection against terrorism, and quality of life.

While voters trusted leavers more on these topics, they trusted remainers more on the economy and the cost of living – but of course not enough to sway the balance.

Tens of thousands of people put off their decision till late, the Ashcroft analysis shows, perhaps explaining why the opinion polls were so volatile.

Fewer than half of voters said they had always known how they would vote. About a quarter left it to the final week of the campaign to make up their minds – and about one in ten voters only decided on polling day itself.

Asked why they had voted Out, almost half of leavers (49 per cent) said the biggest single reason was 'the principle that decisions about the UK should be taken in the UK'

Overall, the older the voter, the more likely they were to have chosen to leave the EU. While three-quarters of those aged 18 to 24 voted to remain, a majority of those over 45 voted to leave. Around two-thirds of council and housing association tenants voted for Brexit.

Vote-Remain was highest among people with university educations.

Among Conservative voters, 58 per cent chose to leave. Among Labour, it was 37 per cent. And nearly one in three Lib Dems – once led by arch-europhile Nick Clegg – gave their vote to leave.

Despite Green Party MP Caroline Lucas saying she was 'heartbroken' at the result yesterday, some 25 per cent of her party's supporters were in the camp to leave. Bizarrely, some 4 per cent of UKIP supporters – whose party's entire raison d'etre is independence from the European Union – voted to remain.



Geographically, the pockets of remainers included cities in which universities loomed large – 56 per cent for remaining in Norwich, more than 60 per cent in Bristol, rising to 70 per cent and more in Oxford and Cambridge – all of which are home to many of 'the experts' derided by the leavers. 

Wales, another former Labour heartland, defied predictions by narrowly choosing Brexit and, in common with the national trend, its more prosperous regions – the Vale of Glamorgan and the student-heavy capital in Cardiff – both chose to remain.

The East of England matched the polls' predictions as one of the most eurosceptic parts of the UK, with almost three in five of its residents backing Brexit.

This region is home to MP Douglas Carswell's constituency, Clacton, the only Ukip seat in Parliament, which contains the most deprived area in the UK, with 33 per cent youth unemployment, where locals blamed Europe and uncontrolled immigration for the decline of the seaside town.

Remain was strong almost everywhere in the capital – 75 per cent in Islington and Camden, 78 per cent in Hackney, 66 per cent in wealthy Kensington and Chelsea.

But Leave still managed a majority in the East London working class neighbourhoods of Havering, Barking and Dagenham, plus Bexley and a number of neighbouring areas in the Thames estuary. 

Commentator Roy Greenslade said yesterday that for residents in these areas, the economy was 'a vague concept compared to their everyday experience of immigration'.

Mass migration played a crucial role in the result with areas having the highest influx of foreigners voting most strongly to leave.

Concerns about the impact on jobs, wages, schools and healthcare, plus sweeping changes to neighbourhoods, drove millions to back Brexit.

Boston, Lincolnshire, dubbed ‘the most Eastern European place in Britain’, was the most eurosceptic place in the UK as 75.6 per cent voted to quit. In nearby Fenland, which contains Wisbech, where around a third of 30,000 residents are from Eastern Europe, 71.4 per cent backed Brexit.

In neighbouring South Holland, which has Spalding – one of the four most segregated towns in the country – 73.6 per cent voted Leave.

Former coalfield communities in the East Midlands appear to have acted on the same concerns. Some 71 per cent in Bolsover backed Brexit. The area contains Shirebrook, dubbed ‘Little Poland’. In Mansfield, Leave polled 70.9 per cent.

Most major pollsters failed to predict the success of the Out camp, a year after they misread the General Election. Only two of the six polls released the day before the EU poll – by TNS and Opinium – correctly forecast the result.

Of the 168 polls commissioned since September, barely a third called a win for Leave.

Pollster Survation did correctly forecast 52 per cent for Leave and 48 per cent for Remain on September 4 and June 15. But it revised its data just before the vote, putting Remain on 51 per cent.

ORB decided to allocate undecided voters three to one in favour of staying which gave the status quo an eight-point lead. David Cameron’s own pollster Andrew Cooper hailed a survey on voting day which showed a ten-point lead for Remain.

Bookmakers reported record levels of betting for a political event as punters staked thousands – and some made a killing. But a woman placing her first bet lost £100,000 after backing Remain.

 

