Sir Cover-up faces bias quiz by MPs over accusations he used the Government machine to support the Remain campaign

2016-6-23

Sir Jeremy Heywood, the Cabinet Secretary, has been accused of allowing the civil service to become an 'engine for pro-EU propaganda'

Britain's top civil servant is to be hauled before MPs to explain his use of the Government machine in support of the 'Remain' campaign.

Sir Jeremy Heywood, the Cabinet Secretary, has come under fire for instructing officials not to help anti-EU ministers during the referendum - and for allowing government websites to be plastered with Remain material.

Last month Iain Duncan Smith accused him of allowing the civil service to become an 'engine for pro-EU propaganda'.

Now it has emerged that the Commons public administration committee will demand Sir Jeremy – known as Sir Cover-Up for his attitude to the freedom of information – to appear before it. Bernard Jenkin, Tory Leave campaigner and chairman of the committee, said: 'We are going to hold a post-referendum inquiry and without doubt Sir Jeremy Heywood will be a key witness.

'There will be questions about purdah, the quality of advice to civil servants, the whole conduct of government during the run-up to the referendum, as well as questions about improvements that can be made to electoral machinery and the Electoral Commission.'

Brexit campaigners are angry at advice written by Sir Jeremy which banned civil servants from giving information pertaining to the EU campaign to those ministers campaigning for Leave.

They were also concerned at the mountain of scaremongering propaganda put out by government departments up to the end of May, and the way government websites have been covered in pro-Remain information. The Leave camp accuse Sir Jeremy of blocking the release of sensitive information about the impact of the EU on public services.

Tory backbenchers also claim he has ordered civil servants to refuse to answer parliamentary questions that might jeopardise David Cameron's bid to keep Britain in the EU.

There will also be questions about the Cabinet Office's decision to extend voter registration for 48 hours after the Electoral Commission website went down for 90 minutes.

Last month Iain Duncan Smith accused Sir Jeremy of allowing the civil service to become an 'engine for pro-EU propaganda'

Lord Tebbit, the pro-Brexit former Tory chairman, said: 'I think the civil service has been misused.' But he said he blamed the Prime Minister rather than Sir Jeremy, because the Cabinet Secretary had to bow to his orders.

One Tory backbencher said: 'The Cabinet Secretary only does what the Prime Minister wants him to do.'

Examples of taxpayer-funded 'propaganda' included a message in huge letters displayed on the Treasury website saying: 'UK economy would fall into RECESSION if Britain leaves the EU'.

