Michael Gove makes grovelling apology for comparing pro-EU experts to Nazi propagandists after Cameron accuses him of having ‘lost it’ during referendum battle

2016-6-22

Michael Gove has made a grovelling apology after comparing pro-EU experts to Nazi propagandists.

The Justice Secretary admitted he had been 'clumsy and inappropriate' to make the comments as he dismissed dire forecasts for the consequences of Brexit.

The climbdown came after David Cameron branded the remarks a 'massive mistake' and suggested that Mr Gove had 'lost it'.

Recalling the Nazis' treatment of Jewish scientist Einstein during the 1930s, Mr Gove had told LBC: 'I think the key thing here is to interrogate the assumptions that are made and to ask if these arguments are good.

Michael Gove (pictured) compared economic experts warning about the fall-out of Brexit to the Nazis who orchestrated a smear campaign against Albert Einstein in the 1930s

'We have to be careful about historical comparisons, but Albert Einstein during the 1930s was denounced by the German authorities for being wrong and his theories were denounced, and one of the reasons of course he was denounced was because he was Jewish.

'They got 100 German scientists in the pay of the government to say that he was wrong and Einstein said: 'Look, if I was wrong, one would have been enough.'''

Mr Gove added: 'The truth is that if you look at the quality of the analysis, if you look at the facts on the ground, you can come to an appropriate conclusion.

'And the appropriate conclusion, I think, all of us can come to is that with growth rates so low in Europe, with so many unemployed and with the nature of the single currency so damaging, freeing ourselves from that project can only strengthen our economy.'

He made his comments after being challenged over why he is not heeding the advice of many economists who have warned that Brexit could have dire consequences and tip the economy into recession.

The International Monetary Fund, ten Nobel-prize winning economists and the Bank of England have all warned that leaving the EU could damage the economy.

And in a letter in The Times today, the bosses of 1,285 firms that employ 1.75million people write: 'Britain leaving the EU would mean uncertainty for our firms, less trade with Europe and fewer jobs. 

In a statement today Mr Gove said: 'Yesterday I was asked a question by Iain Dale about the predictions of doom for the economy. 

'I answered as I often do with a historical analogy. It was clumsy and inappropriate. 

'Obviously I did not mean to imply anything about the motives of those who have spoken out in favour of staying in the EU. 

'Throughout the campaign I’ve avoided making personal attacks, I'm sorry for speaking so clumsily, and apologise for giving offence. 

'I think Britain will be more prosperous if we end our connection to the euro project and I should have answered this question directly.' 

In a dramatic escalation of Tory infighting earlier, Mr Cameron told Sky News: 'To hear the Leave campaign today sort of comparing independent experts and economists to Nazi sympathisers - I think they have rather lost it.

'These people are independent - economists who have won Nobel prizes, business leaders responsible for creating thousands of jobs, institutions that were set up after the war to try to provide independent advice. It is right to listen.'

In a joint statement, three respected economic think-tanks have said 'almost all those who have looked seriously' at the consequences of Brexit agreed it would be highly likely to harm the living standards of UK households.

James Bond star Daniel Craig (pictured left) revealed his support for Britain staying in the EU after posing in a T-shirt with the slogan: 'No man is an island. No country by itself. Vote Remain on 23rd June'. It came hours after David and Victoria Beckham (pictured right) declared their support for Britain staying in the EU

James Bond star Daniel Craig is the latest celebrity to declare his support for Britain staying in the EU. 

He was pictured last night wearing a white T-shirt with the slogan: 'No man is an island. No country by itself. Vote Remain on 23rd June.' 

The picture of the retiring James Bond in the pro-EU T-shirt was first published by Turner Prize-winning artist Wolfgang Tillmans, who told his Instagram followers that Craig had sent him the picture. 

Minutes after the picture appeared online David Cameron tweeted it along with the words: 'It's great to see Daniel Craig is planning to Vote Remain on Thursday.' 



It delivers another boost to the Remain campaign after the endorsements of David and Victoria Beckham urged voters to support staying in the EU 'for our children'.

The England footballing hero and his fashion designer wife said Britain should be facing the challenges of the world together with its allies. 

He was joined by his former England colleague Rio Ferdinand, who compared EU membership to playing the success they achieved at Manchester United.  

The Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS), National Institute of Economic and Social Research (NIESR) and Centre for Economic Performance (CEP) said: 'In our lifetimes we have never seen such a degree of unanimity among economists on a major policy issue.' 

Mr Gove, who co-chairs the Vote Leave campaign, said experts cannot always be trusted and pointed to the German scientists used to denounce Einstein to back up his point.

He also hinted that he will quit government if voters do not back Brexit in the EU referendum this week, saying he would 'reflect' on the result before deciding his future. 

His comments came as the bosses of more than half of Britain's biggest businesses urged voters to avoid causing economic chaos by voting to stay in the EU in tomorrow's historic referendum. 

In the largest business endorsement of the bitter campaign so far, 1,285 bosses representing 51 of the FTSE 100 firms that a vote to leave the EU would cost jobs, trigger uncertainty and less trade for Britain.  





'Britain remaining in the EU would mean the opposite – more certainty, more trade and more jobs,' they wrote.

'EU membership is good for business and good for British jobs. That's why, on June 23rd, we back Britain remaining in the EU.' 

They claim small businesses and their staff are 'particularly vulnerable' from a Brexit vote.  



Yesterday Mr Gove again attacked David Cameron over his failure to curb immigration.

The Justice Secretary, a close friend of the Prime Minister, argued that cutting ties with Brussels was the only way of regaining control over our borders.



But he also rejected criticism that the Tories manifesto for the general election had been a 'lie' amid claims David Cameron was told by civil servants four years ago that a key immigration pledge could not be met within the bloc.

Asked about his future during an interview on BBC Radio 4's Today programme, Mr Gove said: 'I will do exactly as the Prime Minister asks me.

'I want people to concentrate not on my job but on their jobs. Of course, depending on what the result is on Friday, I will reflect and I will decide what is the best course for me.' 

Mr Gove's latest comments came as six leading figures from the Remain and Vote Leave campaigns went head-to-head in a bruising, two-hour debate at Wembley Arena last night. 

In the final major showdown of the bitter campaign - coming less than 36 hours before polls open in the historic referendum, leading Brexit campaigner Boris Johnson urged voters to make the EU referendum Britain's 'Independence Day'. 

He was involved in brutal clashes with Sadiq Khan and fellow Tory Ruth Davidson in the crunch TV debate.

With less than 36 hours left until the polls open, Mr Johnson laid into the Remain side for 'talking the country down' by issuing a slew of dire Project Fear warnings about the consequences of cutting ties with Brussels. 

But newly-installed London Mayor Mr Khan hit back by accusing him of telling 'lie after lie' and running 'Project Hate', while Scottish Conservative leader Ms Davidson lashed out at him for trying to turn the programme into 'the Boris show'.

The exchanges came as the sides clashed in a BBC special at Wembley Arena likely to have been watched by millions.

Boris Johnson (pictured) said Dyson founder James Dyson was one of many businessmen in favour of Brexit. Sadiq Khan (right) accused the Leave campaign of telling 'lie after lie' 

Mr Johnson was joined by Tory Treasury minister Andrea Leadsom and Labour's Gisela Stuart for the programme in front of a 6,000 strong live audience.

Alongside Mr Khan were Scottish Conservative leader Ms Davidson and TUC Secretary General Frances O'Grady.

Taking to the stage in London tonight, Mr Khan said the country would face the 'most important decision for a generation' on Thursday.

A Remain vote would mean people are 'both better off and safer'.

Audience member Maxine Fothergill said she was a small business owner employing 10 staff and told the panellists that her firm was one of many in the UK that were 'stifled' by EU regulation. 

Ms Davidson said she knew the EU was 'a bit frustrating but what it means is you cannot be undercut'.

She insisted that tariffs and taxes would be increased if we were outside the EU.

But Mr Johnson laughed off the idea of tariffs, arguing that Germany sold a fifth of its car output in the UK. 

'I must say that I think that it was extraordinary to hear that we would have tariffs imposed on us because everybody knows that this country receives about a fifth of Germany's entire car manufacturing output - 820,000 vehicles a year,' he said.

'Do you seriously suppose that they are going to be so insane as to allow tariffs to be imposed between Britain and Germany? 

In some of the most heated scenes of the evening, Ms Davidson accused Mr Johnson of not caring about workers, saying he would not 'guarantee jobs'.

But Mr Johnson said: 'They are back to Project Fear within moments. They have nothing positive to say.'



 

