You're not getting anything else! Cameron got the 'maximum' from his renegotiation and the EU has no more to offer after Brexit vote, Commission boss warns 

2016-6-22

British voters were today warned there is no chance of a second renegotiation with the EU if they back Brexit tomorrow.

Jean-Claude Juncker, the EU Commission President, said 'out is out' and ruled out re-opening talks in a bid to reverse a vote to quit the EU.

In remarks sure to be seized upon by the Vote Leave campaign, Mr Juncker said David Cameron got the 'maximum' reform possible in his renegotiation that was concluded in February.

The deal has been derided as empty and useless by Brexit campaigners and the Prime Minister has been forced to admit more reform is still needed.

EU Commission president Jean-Claude Juncker today claimed David Cameron had already extracted the 'maximum' from the EU Britain would not get any other reforms by voting for Brexit 

Mr Juncker said today: 'The British policy makers and British voters have to know that there will not be any kind of renegotiation.

'Out is out.' 

He added: 'We have concluded a deal with the prime minister. He got the maximum he could receive and we gave the maximum we could give.

'So there will be no renegotiation, not on the agreement we found in February, nor as far as any kind of treaty negotiations are concerned.'

Vote Leave champion Michael Gove said: 'The Remain Campaign has been claiming in recent days that if you vote to stay in the EU then there could be further reform. The President of the EU, Jean-Claude Juncker, has made very clear today that will not happen.

'If you vote to stay there is no prospect of getting any reform from the EU ever again. We will never get back control of the £350 million we give to the EU every week. The Prime Minister tried to get reforms earlier this year but the EU did not listen. The EU cannot and will not give the British people the change that they want.

'There is a very clear choice in this referendum. Either you vote to keep on giving the EU more power and more of our money every year or join me in voting leave to take back control.' 



Elsewhere today, French President Francois Hollande said a vote to leave would carry a 'very serious' risk of ending British access to the EU's prized single market. 



He said: 'There's a very serious risk for the United Kingdom not to be able to access the common market and ... the European economic area anymore.'

France would 'draw all the conclusions' of such a vote, he warned. 'This would be irreversible.'

Norwegian Prime Minister Erna Solberg fears a British vote to leave the EU would make Europe 'weaker, more fragmented and nationalistic.'

In comments to Norwegian broadcaster NRK, the leader of the oil-rich Scandinavian country that has twice voted in referendums to stay out of the EU said a weaker Europe would mean the economic situation will be more difficult when reforms and competitiveness are needed.

She said: 'But it will also mean a more political and fragmented Europe, a weaker Europe and a weaker world.'

Ms Solberg said that in a world where 'we are increasingly dependent on each other and solve issues together, it's dangerous to demolish joint institutions,' adding that she is 'deeply worried' should Britain opt out of the EU.

French president Francois Hollande said a Brexit vote would risk Britain getting locked out of the single market which offers tariff free trading across the EU 

On Monday, Donald Tusk issued a direct appeal to Britain not to vote for Brexit, urging voters to 'stay with us'.

The European Council president made the last ditch plea with just three days until the United Kingdom votes on whether to Leave or Remain a member of the European Union.

Brussels had largely stayed out of the referendum battle until polls suggested Britain could vote for Brexit on Thursday - prompting Mr Tusk to issue a dire warning about the collapse of 'western political civilisation'.

Mr Tusk, who is responsible for running the council meetings attended by heads of state and government, today struck a more conciliatory tone.

He said: 'I would like to appeal to the British citizens, on behalf, I know that for a fact, of almost all Europeans and European leaders: Stay with us.

'Without you, not only Europe, but the whole Western community will become weaker. Together, we will be able to cope with increasingly difficult challenges of the future.'

David Cameron was back on the stump for the final day of campaigning today as he scrambled to convince voters not to back a Brexit tomorrow 

He added: 'In no way are we downplaying the economic costs that would accompany Brexit ... I have no doubt, however, that we are already prepared for the day after the referendum.'

Mr Tusk acknowledged the EU would need to be reformed regardless of the result on Thursday because of growing Euroscepticism across the continent.

He said: 'We would be foolish if we ignored such a warning signal as the UK referendum.

'There are more signals of dissatisfaction with the Union coming from all of Europe, not only from the UK.' 



 



