Nigel Farage accuses 'scared' David Cameron of linking him and the Leave campaign to the tragic killing of Jo Cox to try and win the referendum

2016-6-20

Ukip leader Nigel Farage, seen today at the BBC, has accused David Cameron of linking the death of Jo Cox to the referendum campaign 

Nigel Farage today accused David Cameron of linking the killing of Jo Cox to the referendum, insisting the Remain campaign were behaving in a way that was 'quite wrong'.

The Ukip leader has been fighting accusations he published a racist poster on immigration and has insisted it has only became a row because of Mrs Cox's death.

The killing on the streets of Birstall last Thursday lunchtime brought an immediate halt to all referendum campaigning for two days. 

Mr Cameron today insisted he was doing no more than paying deserved tributes to the late Batley and Spen MP Mrs Cox. 

The Brexit battle will pause again this afternoon as the House of Commons is recalled to mark the death and pay tribute to mother of two Mrs Cox.

Mr Farage risked provoking outrage today by claiming Mr Cameron and the Remain campaign were directly linking the death to how people should vote on Thursday.

Speaking to LBC radio, Mr Farage said: 'What we are seeing here is the prime minister and the Remain campaign trying to conflate the actions of one crazed individual with the motives of half of Britain who think we should get back control of our borders and do it sensibly.

'And I think that's quite wrong the way it's been done.

'I think there are Remain camp supporters out there who are using this tragic death to try to give the impression that this isolated, horrific incident is somehow linked to arguments that have been made by myself, or Michael Gove or anybody else in this campaign.

'And frankly that is wrong.'

He added: 'We have a Prime Minister and a Chancellor and other big political leaders in Britain who are scared witless.

'They thought they would win this referendum by a country mile.

'They know it's neck and neck, they know it's down to who turns out on the day to vote, and there is no level of denigration or false association that they will not stoop to, but I think people are intelligent enough to see through this sort of thing.'

Asked during a campaign visit to Cowley, Oxfordshire, whether he was using the MP's death for political advantage, Mr Cameron said: 'What I have been talking about in respect of Jo is what a wonderful human being and great politician and great campaigner she was.'

He added: 'Last week a brilliant Member of Parliament, a loving mother, a loving wife was tragically murdered on our streets.

'What everyone has been saying, and what I say again, is paying tribute not only to her but the values she lived by and epitomised in public life of tolerance, of service, of community.

'That's what we are saying about her.'

David Cameron visited Birstall on Friday to lay flowers and pay tribute to the MP, who was killed arriving at her advice surgery in the town 

Mr Cameron yesterday did evoke the pro-EU views of murdered MP Jo Cox amid a continuing row over whether the tragedy was being politicised.

On Twitter, the Prime Minister highlighted the final article written by the Labour MP, in which she warned voters not to 'fall for the spin' that quitting the EU would solve concerns over immigration.

Mr Cameron praised her 'strong voice' in the referendum campaign and said it would be 'badly missed' in the closing days.

Stronger In campaigners said that by linking to her article, the Prime Minister was simply ensuring her voice would be heard.

But the intervention came amid clashes over whether Mrs Cox's death was being politicised.

At lunchtime, pro-Brexit Labour MP Kate Hoey told a rally: 'Jo was a democrat and she would want this referendum campaign to continue, and she would want no one to link anything around this referendum with that terrible tragedy.'

Mrs Cox's final article was re-published yesterday in several newspapers and by the Stronger In campaign.

Alongside a link to it, the Prime Minister tweeted: 'Jo Cox's strong voice in the campaign to remain in the EU will be badly missed.' 

However, the row came after a former defence minister lashed out at pro-EU figures for trying to 'spin' the tragic killing of Jo Cox in a bid to win the referendum.

Tory MP Andrew Murrison tweeted the comment as polls showed the race was neck and neck again after a surge for Remain.

However, soon afterwards he deleted the post and replaced it with one that urged both sides to put their cases 'squarely, honestly and decently'. 

The referendum was due to pause again this afternoon as MPs gathered in Westminster to share their grief and make tributes to Mrs Cox in the House of Commons 



 

 

