Loner MP murder suspect 'had stash of Nazi regalia at his home and bought a manual on how to make a hand gun' as police investigate the mental health care history

2016-6-17

The loner accused of murdering Jo Cox had amassed Nazi memorabilia and other far-Right material, it was claimed last night.

Thomas Mair, 52, is suspected of harbouring a secret obsession with white supremacy groups dating back more than two decades.

Sources claimed police search teams have recovered fascist mementoes and literature from his council home in Birstall, West Yorkshire. Anti-fascist campaigners have produced leaked invoices showing the purchase of up to £600 from a US-based neo-Nazi group.

These included texts on how to build homemade guns and explosives from materials available in DIY stores and an ‘Improvised Munitions Handbook’.

Thomas Mair (left) has been arrested over the killing of MP Jo Cox (right). Records which emerged in the US this morning appear to show he bought books from a far-Right group, including one which described how to make a handgun at home

Police at the home of Tommy Mair. It was reported this afternoon that 'Nazi regalia' was found at the property during a search yesterday

Other items on the invoices – which date back to the 1990s – included Ich Kampfe, an illustrated handbook issued to Nazi party members during the Second World War. 

The niche publications were purchases from the American group National Alliance, which advocates the creation of an all-white homeland and the eradication of Jews.

Officers are also investigating whether Mair has any links to convicted terrorist Terence Gavan, who lived less than three miles away.

Former BNP member Gavan, 46, was jailed in 2010 after police discovered a terrifying arsenal of weapons at the home he shared with his elderly mother. 



Left, A framed photograph of MP Jo Cox and her husband outside 10 Downing Street has been placed among the floral tributes near the murder scene. Right, the much-loved MP pictured in her wedding dress 

Police have now confirmed the MP was the victim of a 'targeted' killing, and detectives are investigating the suspect's reported links to far-Right extremism as a 'priority line of enquiry'.

It has also been revealed Mrs Cox had received threats of a sexual nature at her Westminster office, which had been investigated by the Metropolitan Police.  

West Yorkshire Police yesterday evening confirmed officers were working with the North East Counter Terrorism Unit in the murder investigation.

Chief Constable Dee Collins added: 'We are aware of two previous unrelated incidents which culminated in Jo receiving a malicious communication of a sexual nature at her parliamentary office in Westminster.

'Both incidents were investigated by the Metropolitan Police Service which resulted in an individual receiving an adult caution for one offence which I can confirm is not the same person who we have in custody.' 

Mair volunteered at Oakwell Hall country park in Birstall in 2010 after being a patient of the Mirfield-based Pathways Day Centre for adults with mental illness, according to a Huddersfield Examiner report at the time.

He told the paper: 'I can honestly say it has done me more good than all the psychotherapy and medication in the world.

'Many people who suffer from mental illness are socially isolated and disconnected from society, feelings of worthlessness are also common, mainly caused by long-term unemployment.'

Rob Webster, chief executive at South West Yorkshire Partnership NHS Foundation Trust, which runs the centre said: 'Our thoughts are with Jo's family, friends and colleagues during this tragic time. This is an ongoing police investigation and we are unable to comment further.'  



It was reported Mair volunteered at Oakwell Hall country park in Birstall in 2010 after being a patient of the Mirfield-based Pathways Day Centre for adults with mental illness (pictured)

A photo of a manual said to have been bought by Mair shows instructions for how a handgun can be made. The gun pictured is one of a number of weapons described in the book

A receipt published in the US today appears to show Mair bought books on munitions, incendiaries and explosives in 1999

According to US-based civil rights group, the Southern Poverty Law Centre (SPLC), Mair was sent an invoice for £430 ($620) worth of books by the National Alliance, which was a white separatist movement until it ceased operations as a membership organisation in 2013.

Among these was a book called 'Incendiaries' and one called 'Improvised Munitions Handbook', a manual on how to build a pistol, according to an invoice obtained by the SPLC.

Heidi Beirich, a senior member of the centre, said: ‘These kinds of materials were not widely available before the internet and he would have had to go to specialised places like the National Alliance.

‘These books are very dangerous. At the time there were only a handful of books on bomb making equipment and these are among them.’

Other apparent receipts with Mair's name on them are dated 2003. It is not known whether any of the books were ever delivered. 

Another claim about Mair's political leanings came when his name and address appeared on a list of former subscribers to an anti-ANC pro-white South African magazine. 

The newspaper, then known as the South African Patriot, rejected 'multi-cultural societies, expansionist Islam and third world tyrants', and supported 'imperial solidarity'. In 1987, it moved to the UK 'following the fall of civilized rule in South Africa'.



Hilary Benn, MP for Leeds Central, Speaker of the House of Commons John Bercow, PM David Cameron, Commons chaplain Reverend Rose Hudson-Wilkin and Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn arrive in Birstall this afternoon

Mr Cameron and Mr Corbyn were in Birstall to pay their respects to the mother-of-two who was visciously killed yesterday

Both of the political leaders left heart-felt handwritten notes paying their respects to the 'passionate' Mrs Cox. David Cameron wrote that she would 'never be forgotten' (left), while Mr Corbyn said Mrs Cox's life had been 'dedicated to justice and human rights' (right)



Neighbours of Mair said his semi-detached council house had been his home since childhood, and that he had lived there alone since his grandmother died around 20 years ago.

Last night Mair’s neighbour Diana Peters said she believed he taught English as a foreign language three times a week to migrant families.

‘If you’d told me Tommy was going to turn into Father Christmas I’d have thought that was more likely than him being a neo-Nazi,’ she said.

Duane St Louis, age 41, the suspect's half-brother and Mary's son with second husband Reginald St Louis, said Mair had obsessive compulsive disorder and cleaned himself with Brillo pads because he was 'obsessed with his personal hygiene'.  

Speaking from his home in Dewsbury, West Yorkshire, he added: 'He's never expressed any views about Britain, or politics or racist tendencies. I'm mixed race and I'm his half-brother, we got on well. He never married. 

'The only time I remember him having a girlfriend was as a young man, but a mate stole her off him. He said that put him off [women] for life.'

Scott Mair, 50, said his brother had a 'history of mental illness, but he has had help'.  

Mrs Cox's fellow MP Rachel Reeves breaks down in tears at the scene in Birstall market place this morning where her friend was murdered

(L-R) Lucy Powell MP, Jeff Smith MP, Paula Sheriff MP and Karen Rawling arrive to leave floral tributes where Mrs Cox was murdered

The group could not contain their grief after they left messages on flowers saying: 'Goodnight beautiful lady' and 'RIP Jo'

Locals in Birstall wept today as they laid floral tributes at the scene of yesterday's killing. David Cameron said: 'We've lost a great star'

Flowers and tribute messages laid at the cenotaph in the centre of Birstall, near where Mrs Cox was shot and stabbed yesterday

Mourners gather in the town's market square, which has been transformed into a shrine to the MP, filled with flowers and messages

Mair, who was born in Kilmarnock, Scotland, also regularly helped his mother Mary Goodall, 69, who last night told friends she feels responsible for what he is alleged to have done.

Rosemary Surman, 61, who is a friend of Mair's mother, Mary, told MailOnline today: 'Mary didn't know anything was wrong. It was a normal day and then we saw that on the news. She's just so sorry for those two little children who have lost their mum.' 

She denied that the attack was 'politically motivated', adding: 'We've been talking to him and asking him about whether we should be in or out of the EU and he always said there were good arguments for both sides. He had never mentioned Jo Cox before ever, I don't think he even knew who she was.

Duane St Louis, age 41, the suspect's half-brother (pictured) said Mair had obsessive compulsive disorder and cleaned himself with Brillo pads because he was 'obsessed with his personal hygiene'

'He couldn't even stand the sight of blood, when he cut his finger or something he couldn't look at it.'

Mother-of-two Mrs Cox was punched and kicked to the ground by her attacker before being shot three times – once in the head - with what was described as an 'antique gun' outside a West Yorkshire library yesterday afternoon.

The married 41-year-old, a dedicated and popular MP, died from the catastrophic injuries she sustained in the attack, after the killer ambushed her as she walked to her constituency surgery at about 1pm.

David Cameron, Jeremy Corbyn, Commons speaker John Bercow and shadow foreign secretary Hilary Benn visited the scene today. 

One by one the five laid flowers, including bouquets of red roses, at the makeshift memorial, and solemnly paused to reflect on the tragedy.

Mr Cameron and Mr Corbyn stood side by side to pay tribute to Mrs Cox, and reveal that parliament would be recalled on Monday so MPs could pay tribute to their colleague.

Mr Cameron said he had first met Mrs Cox in Darfur in 2006, where she was 'doing what she was brilliant at – looking after and saving the lives of vulnerable people.'

'Two children have lost their mother, a husband has lost a loving wife and parliament has lost one of its most compassionate campaigners,'  



Mr Corbyn described her death as an 'attack on democracy' and said: 'Jo was brutally murdered here 24 hours ago in this town, a town she live in, a town she grew up in, serving the community she loved.'

He added: 'She was taken from us in an act of hatred, in a vile act that killed her, it was an attack on democracy.'

Mr Corbyn also spoke of Mrs Cox's husband and children, describing the heartbreaking statement Mr Cox gave to his wife as 'wonderful', reiterating Mr Cox's desire that Mrs Cox be remembered by trying to 'conquer hatred with love and respect.'

He added: 'She leaves behind two young children who will never see their mother again, they will grow up only knowing what she stood for.' 







Mrs Cox's friend and fellow Labour MP Rachel Reeves broke down in tears as she and others visited the centre of Birstall this morning, where hundreds of flowers and cards have been laid by grieving locals.

Flags across Whitehall are flying at half-mast, while flags at Buckingham Palace and the Palace of Holyroodhouse in Edinburgh are also lowered in tribute. A Buckingham Palace spokesman said the Queen had written privately to Mrs Cox's husband, Brendon. 



Three Labour MPs also embraced and wiped away tears as they lay flowers scene of her murder today.

Dressed in black, Dewsbury MP Paula Sherriff, Manchester Withington MP Jeff Smith and Manchester Central MP Lucy Powell left bouquets of red roses among the floral tributes to their colleague.

The group, with Labour Party member Karen Rowling, could not contain their emotions as they stood looking at the flowers and reading the messages at the Priestley Memorial in Birstall.

The boat where Ms Cox lived was covered with flowers this morning as people rushed to pay their respects to the MP

Flowers have been left on Mrs Cox's houseboat in London this morning. Fellow houseboat owners say they are devastated by her death

A book of condolence was also set up in honour of Ms Cox at the moorings in Wapping where she lived

Doncaster Central MP Dame Rosie Winterton also left flowers for Mrs Cox.

The group stood in front of the memorial with their heads bowed and arms around each other. They wiped tears from their cheeks and shared an embrace in the street before leaving.

Scottish Secretary David Mundell has revealed he received a death threat after MPs backed airstrikes against Islamic State (IS) in Syria.

The minister said police had advised him of a 'credible' threat in the wake of a Commons vote in favour of the action in December 2015.

He said, however, that Mrs Cox would not have wanted politicians to 'pull up the shutter' and become less accessible to the public.

Speaking after a meeting of the British-Irish Council in Glasgow, he said: 'I didn't make it public at the time, but immediately after the Syria vote I received what police regarded as a credible death threat.

'It's very concerning, not just for yourself but for your family, your staff in particular.

'The police do offer very good guidance and support in relation to how to carry out your duties in the safest possible way.

'But, ultimately, accessibility is at the heart of politics and you can't let those people who want to disrupt our political system win by refusing to be accessible to the public.

'I know Jo Cox would not have wanted us to pull the shutter up as a response to yesterday's dreadful events.'

He criticised the 'vilification' politicians are subjected to, saying 'we've come to accept abuse and name-calling as a matter of course'.

He continued: 'When people hear about Jo, they understand that she is the exact opposite of the stereotype, somebody who wasn't in it for themselves, somebody who took huge personal sacrifices, having a young family, having to come to London, because she wanted to do better for her community and the wider world.'

Ms Powell's message to Mrs Cox read: 'Dearest Jo, we all love you so much. It's hard to comprehend that something so awful has happened to someone so beautiful. Love you always.' 



The vicar of Birstall said the community is 'stunned' after the death of Jo Cox as he opened a book of condolence.

More than 400 people packed into St Peter's Church in the West Yorkshire village on Thursday night to pay their respects to the young Labour MP in a vigil.

Rev Paul Knight opened a book of condolence as church members provided tea and a place for contemplation.

The vicar said: 'We wanted to give people the opportunity to pass on their sympathies for Jo, who was obviously so much liked in this area.

'At this point people don't know what to do. So we're giving them the space and the opportunity to voice or express their concerns, and their disappointments and their hurt.'

He added: 'I think for the most part people are just stunned. Shocked but stunned.

'I do detect a little bit of difference today as people wake up and are maybe thinking it was almost like a dream, like a TV show. But this morning it was reality. This has actually happened in our community.'

He said he knew Mrs Cox, who was 'bubbly, vivacious, enthusiastic and passionate about helping the people of this area'. 

Mrs Cox, lived with her husband and two young children on a houseboat on the Thames. Before winning her seat last May she worked as an adviser to Gordon Brown's wife, Sarah, and Lady Kinnock. 

















The close knit community of boat owners along the River Thames also paid a nautical tribute to their loving friend. At 8pm, boats berthed in Wapping by Tower Bridge blasted their horns three times before a full two minute blast in memory of Mrs Cox.

As the horns rang out, some neighbours stood solemnly by their boats with tears in their eyes before five children, holding a single red rose approached the houseboat and threw them onto the deck.

Holding back tears Anne, the chairman of Hermitage Moorings where Mrs Cox lived with roughly 45 others, said: '[This] is the saddest day of this close community. We have lost a dear, dear friend in the most tragic and outrageous circumstances.

'We pay tribute to our amazing, wonderful and spirited member of this community. A beacon of hope who believed in love friendship and values that we all so much need at this time.

'The community will continue to be inspired by her relentless energy and commitment to all that is good. Our thoughts go to her husband Brendan and her two wonderful children.'

Before she reached the end of her speech, Anne burst into tears and turned away throwing her own red rose onto the houseboat. 

It emerged today that additional security was being considered at her constituency surgery in Birstall, as well as her houseboat on the River Thames in London after she received threatening messages. 





A source said that Mrs Cox had 'thought little of' the harassing messages until the 'volume and frequency stepped up'. A man was cautioned over them, and police have confirmed this was not the same man who was arrested yesterday following the attack.

There is no known link between the messages she had received and the attack and it was reported that her security had not been upgraded before she was targeted.

A picture has been circulated on social media that is said to show the suspect being arrested after the attack in Leeds yesterday afternoon

Forensic officers are seen outside the home of the attacker, who has been named locally as Thomas Mair, as the investigation continues

In a statement, West Yorkshire Police Temporary Chief Constable Dee Collins said: 'A murder investigation is under way by West Yorkshire Police who are working together with the North East Counter Terrorism Unit, who will bring specialist assets in support of the enquiry.

'We are aware of the speculation...in respect of the suspect's link to mental health services and this is a clear line of enquiry which we are pursuing.

'We are also aware of the inference of the suspect being linked to right wing extremism which is again a priority line of enquiry which will help us establish the motive for the attack on Jo. 

'Based on information available at this time, this appears to be an isolated, but targeted attack upon Jo - there is also no indication at this stage that anyone else was involved in the attack. However we will be investigating how the suspect came to be in possession of an unlawfully held firearm.

'West Yorkshire Police have not been made aware of any complaints or concerns from Jo Cox.

'The suspect in custody has been medically examined by two specialist medical practitioners who have determined that he is both fit for detention and fit for interview and detectives will continue to question the suspect during the day.'

A forensic officer picks up a shoe from the ground and inspects it after Mrs Cox was stabbed with a 'hunting knife' and shot three times



MP Mrs Cox was an outspoken supporter of the Remain campaign and had called for more refugees to be given a safe haven on our shores. Last night her husband, charity worker Brendan Cox, 37, said he would dedicate 'every moment' of the rest of his life to his wife's memory.

'Jo believed in a better world and she fought for it every day of her life with an energy, and a zest for life that would exhaust most people,' he said.

'She would have wanted two things above all else to happen now, one that our precious children are bathed in love and two, that we all unite to fight against the hatred that killed her. Hate doesn't have a creed, race or religion, it is poisonous.

'Jo would have no regrets about her life, she lived every day of it to the full.'

Labour MPs (L-R) Yvette Cooper, Naz Shah, Dan Jarvis, Rachel Reeves and Mary Creagh at a vigil in St Peters Church in the town of Birstall

Pictured left to right: MPs Yvette Cooper (Pontefract and Castleford), Naz Shah (Bradford West) and Dan Jarvis (Barnsley Central), attending a vigil for Mrs Cox in St. Peter's Church, Birstall, near Leeds. Pictured right: A mourner fights back the tears during the service

Labour MP Yvette Cooper was seen wiping away tears as she broke down during the vigil in honour of Mrs Cox who was killed yesterday

Two hours after her death, Mr Cox – with whom she has two young children, aged three and five - tweeted a photograph of her and urged people to 'fight against the hatred that killed her.'

In a moving statement, he said: '[This] is the beginning of a new chapter in our lives. More difficult, more painful, less joyful, less full of love. I and Jo's friends and family are going to work every moment of our lives to love and nurture our kids and to fight against the hate that killed Jo.'

Her parents, Gordon and Jean Leadbeater, who live in the small village of Roberttown, West Yorkshire said the family were 'in shock'.   





Elected to represent Batley and Spen last year, Cambridge University Mrs Cox graduate had already earned great respect for her work ethic and humanitarian campaigning. 



Witnesses said a man in a baseball cap grabbed her, pulling her hair as he punched and kicked her to the ground. As bystanders attempted to intervene, he pulled out a large hunting knife and repeatedly stabbed the MP, also catching a 77-year-old man in the stomach as he tried to intervene.

He then pulled out what appeared to be an antique gun which he fired three times from just a few feet away, aiming the final shot at her head. Some witnesses claimed he looked 'full of range' as he shot her at close-range.

Flowers are laid at a statue to Joseph Priestly in Birstall near to the scene where the popular Labour MP was shot three times and stabbed

Heartbreaking tributes were left on flowers near to the scene of the killing in the town of Birstall, West Yorkshire, yesterday afternoon

One man said the killer deliberately moved in to finish off the MP, firing a final shot to 'the head area' in a horrific attack that lasted up to 15 minutes. 









A 77-year-old have-a-go-hero passer-by who tried to save the MP was stabbed in the stomach. Doctors said last night that he was expected to make a full recovery.

Witness Clarke Rothwell, who runs a cafe near where the attack took place, said the attacker shouted 'Britain first' as he carried out the sickening attack.

He said: 'He was stabbing her with a foot-long knife multiple times while shouting 'Britain first, Britain first, Britain first'. Three times she was shot, the initial time which then she dropped to the floor, and two more times. The third time he got close proximity, he shot her round the head area.'

He added: 'In the meantime he was stabbing her as well, he was stabbing her with his knife.'

The 42-year-old said he had rushed to the scene after hearing a 'popping sound'. He said he turned around to find the gunman standing over her.

'He seemed to have what looked like an old gun, like a musket, in his hand and he shot her again in the middle,' he said.

'He then seemed to shoot a third time, towards her head or face. He was also stabbing at her with what looked like a hunting knife, about a foot long. He was stabbing her and waving the knife around. A man who I know... tried to get near but the man swung his knife around and caught him in the stomach. Blood started coming out.'





Popular MP Jo Cox, 41, has tragically died after she was shot three times - once in the head - and stabbed repeatedly with a 'foot-long knife' by a man as she arrived for a constituency meeting in Birstall near Leeds yesterday. She leaves behind her husband and two children

Mrs Cox, 41, is pictured with her husband Brendan on election night when she was elected as an MP for the Batley and Spen area (left) and posing happily with her husband on their wedding day (right). The MP was shot and died of her injuries outside a constituency meeting

Two hours after her death, Mrs Cox's heartbroken husband Brendan tweeted a photo of her standing by the houseboat they stayed on when they were in London. Just yesterday, he tweeted updates from the River Thames as he rode on a flotilla with their two young children

Cambridge graduate Mrs Cox was elected to the seat of Batley and Spen at the last general election in 2015, having previously worked in aid.

She is national chair of Labour Women's Network, and has worked for various charities including Oxfam, Save the Children and the NSPCC.

The mother of two young children, who is said to enjoy mountain-climbing, boating and running, worked for Oxfam between 2001 and 2009 in a variety of different roles - and it was while working for the charity that she met her husband and father of her children, Brendan.

As head of Oxfam's Brussels office she spearheaded Oxfam's campaign for trade reform. In 2005 she joined Oxfam GB as head of advocacy.  

















A 'happy go lucky girl from Yorkshire': Jo Cox dedicated her life to helping the lives of people on the other side of the world but never forgot her local roots

By Matt Dathan

Jo Cox, 41, (pictured) used her short time as an MP to continue her career-long dedication to helping the plight of refugees and made a name for herself by campaigning on Syria-related issues

Jo Cox was among the rising stars in Parliament before she was shot dead on the streets of her Yorkshire constituency.

She used her short time as an MP to continue her career-long dedication to helping the plight of refugees and made a name for herself by campaigning on Syria-related issues.  

The married mother of two young children was about to celebrate her 42nd birthday next week and yesterday her young family enjoyed a day out at Westminster, pictured in a boat on the Thames during an EU campaign event.  

Mrs Cox was a slight figure but had a powerful voice and used it repeatedly in Parliament over the last year to make the passionate case for taking in more Syrian refugee children.

And it was a fitting outcome that the former aide worker, who had put herself in danger throughout war zones and the developing world, played a central role in persuading the Government to change its mind and agree to accept 3,000  Syrian children into Britain. 

In a memorable speech in April, she told MPs: 'Those children have been exposed to things no child should ever witness, and I know I would risk life and limb to get my two precious babies out of that hellhole.' 



Mrs Cox was born and raised in the West Yorkshire town of Heckmondwike and was elected as the local Batley and Spen MP at the General Election in May 2015, beating the Tories with a 6,051 majority. 

Born to Jean, a school secretary, and father, Gordon, who worked in a local toothpaste and hairspray factory, Cox was educated at Heckmondwike Grammar School and became the first person from her family to graduate from university. 

But before she arrived in Cambridge, she spent the summer working at her dad's factory, packing toothpaste while all her peers enjoyed a gap year. 

She recalled in an interview with the Yorkshire Post how she 'didn't really speak right or knew the right people' at university and admitted her experience at Cambridge 'really knocked me'. 



She read social and political studies at Cambridge University, which is where her passion of politics was born. 

'I just felt like I wasn't quite up to speed with everyone else,' she explained. 'I was a happy go lucky 18-year-old from Yorkshire going out in Leeds having a good time. 

'A lovely life and a lovely family. Then I was thrown into a Cambridge environment where I just didn't get it. It shook me. All my norms and everything I was used to didn't feel like they were right anymore.' 



She went on to work as an adviser for the Labour MP Joan Walley and Baroness, before embarking on a successful career as an aide worker. 



She was married to Brendan Cox, a former adviser to Gordon Brown who has also been chief executive of Save the children.

The 41-year-old also worked closely with Mr Brown's wife Sarah on efforts to prevent mothers and babies dying needlessly in pregnancy.

Since entering the Commons, she has made a name for herself by campaigning on Syria issues, including calling for the UK to enforce a no-fly zone.

In 2015 she abstained in a vote on whether we should join airstrikes.

Mrs Cox nominated Jeremy Corbyn for Labour leader, but is regarded as a moderate within the party and is very popular among her fellow MPs. 

Egoin installs 'collective custom build' property in Edinburgh

Cruel moment man dumps his dog at the roadside before driving off

Police chief speculates there may not have been a drone at all

Bye Felicia! Hair-larious argument over bus seating arrangements

Teenage Meghan put on scene-stealing performance at Christmas show

Chris Evans thanks fans after final BBC Radio 2 breakfast show

Horrifying CCTV shows hit and run driver plough into young men

Shocking moment out-of-control snow plough hits woman in Russia

Hundreds of people flee amid fears 34-storey building will collapse

Dramatic aerial footage of the Krakatoa eruption in Indonesia

Former Lib Dem leader Paddy Ashdown dies aged 77

Smoke spews out of Krakatoa after eruption reportedly caused tsunami

Jo Cox (pictured) was among the rising stars in Parliament before she was shot dead on the streets of her Yorkshire constituency

Days before she died, Jo Cox took part in the traditional tug of war against the House of Lords 

Egoin installs 'collective custom build' property in Edinburgh

Cruel moment man dumps his dog at the roadside before driving off

Police chief speculates there may not have been a drone at all

Bye Felicia! Hair-larious argument over bus seating arrangements

Teenage Meghan put on scene-stealing performance at Christmas show

Chris Evans thanks fans after final BBC Radio 2 breakfast show

Horrifying CCTV shows hit and run driver plough into young men

Shocking moment out-of-control snow plough hits woman in Russia

Hundreds of people flee amid fears 34-storey building will collapse

Dramatic aerial footage of the Krakatoa eruption in Indonesia

Former Lib Dem leader Paddy Ashdown dies aged 77

Smoke spews out of Krakatoa after eruption reportedly caused tsunami



Labour MPs join hundreds of mourners in moving church vigil to honour popular Mrs Cox who 'fizzed with life and crackled with energy'

Hundreds of mourners including Labour MPs Yvette Cooper and Naz Shah attended a special vigil to pay their respects to Mrs Cox who they said 'fizzed with life and crackled with energy'.

Mrs Cox was remembered by her constituents, friends and colleagues as they packed out St Peter's Church in Birstall to mourn their friend and peer.

More than 500 people attended the 40-minute ceremony, including Mrs Cox's fellow Yorkshire MPs Ms Cooper and Ms Shah, who sat silently next to each other.

Labour MP Yvette Cooper (centre) hugs the priest at St Peter's Church after a vigil in memory of Mrs Cox, who was stabbed and shot

Labour MP Yvette Cooper appeared emotional as she consoled the priest following the service which was attended by more than 500

Members of the local community attend a special church service for the killed Labour MP at St Peters Church in Birtsall this evening

Addressing the crowds, Bishop of Huddersfield Rev Jonathan Gibbs said: 'Jo grew up in this community, she loved this community and she served this community. And in the end - she gave her life for this community.'

Bradford West MP Naz Shah was in floods of tears as she shuffled into the church to comfort Mrs Cox's constituents before being seated at the front of the room alongside her peers.

Other MPs - Dan Jarvis, Mary Creagh and Caroline Flint - also attended, and linked arms as they left the church together in a defiant chain.

Opening the ceremony at 8pm, Bishop of Leeds Rev Nick Baines said: 'Welcome on this very sad occasion.

'We pray for Jo and her family and friends, mostly in silence, let's think of what brings us together and what we are responsible for.'

Sobs and sniffles could be heard around the room as the room fell silent to remember their 'loving and caring' MP.

After five minutes of absolute silence, a psalm was read to the large crowd of hundreds.

Speaking at the vigil, Rev Gibbs said: 'None of us could believe the news. The texts and messages came flooding through and we saw the news - and yet we still couldn't believe the news.

'We come tonight, overwhelmed by shock, and above all we are still numb and that is still part of our reaction for all of us, to Brendan, and to her children.

'We should be still tonight - but after a time of stillness we will need a time to talk. There will be anger, hurt and pain, and we need to learn how we deal with that in our own communities.

'We remember Jo as a wife and a mother and tonight we honour both of those. We hold her, we hold the family in our hearts and our pride.

'We pray that justice is done.'

Labour MP's Mary Creagh (left) and Caroline Flint (second right ) leave St Peters church after attending a vigil in honour of their friend

Egoin installs 'collective custom build' property in Edinburgh

Cruel moment man dumps his dog at the roadside before driving off

Police chief speculates there may not have been a drone at all

Bye Felicia! Hair-larious argument over bus seating arrangements

Teenage Meghan put on scene-stealing performance at Christmas show

Chris Evans thanks fans after final BBC Radio 2 breakfast show

Horrifying CCTV shows hit and run driver plough into young men

Shocking moment out-of-control snow plough hits woman in Russia

Hundreds of people flee amid fears 34-storey building will collapse

Dramatic aerial footage of the Krakatoa eruption in Indonesia

Former Lib Dem leader Paddy Ashdown dies aged 77

Smoke spews out of Krakatoa after eruption reportedly caused tsunami

Speaking about the turn out after the ceremony, Rev Gibbs said: 'I'm so pleased by the range of people who have come to pay their respects.

'Jo was hugely respected by the whole community and she had their whole affectionate respect.'

Speaking outside the church about her friend, Wakefield MP Mary Creagh said: 'Jo fizzed with life and crackled with energy.

'She not only cared a lot about family and family values, but also about the forgotten, and disposed of people, and atrocities across the world.

'It has been a very troubling day in our open democracy - but our thoughts are with Brendan and those motherless children.

'Tonight I want Jo to be remembered as warm, witty and principled MP.

'She is such a loss, not just to the Labour party and her constituents, but the entire country.'



'We have lost a great star': David Cameron leads tributes from a shattered Westminster to tragic Labour MP Jo Cox 

David Cameron tonight paid tribute to Mrs Cox and said she was a 'star' in Parliament who had 'huge compassion and a big heart' 

By Tim Sculthorpe 

David Cameron said Britain had lost a 'great star' as he led tributes from a shattered Westminster after the killing of Jo Cox.

The Prime Minister, who has cancelled his referendum campaigning, said it was 'tragic and dreadful news' and sent his thought's to Mrs Cox's husband Brendan.

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn spoke of his shock at the loss of a 'much loss colleague' who was a 'dedicated campaigner for social justice and peace'.

Politicians from across the political spectrum revealed their grief after news of Mrs Cox's death was confirmed shortly after 5pm.  

Mr Cameron said: 'This is absolutely tragic and dreadful news. My thoughts are with Jo's husband Brendan, her two children, and their wider family.

'We have lost a great star. She was a great campaigning MP with huge compassion and a big heart and people are going to be very, very sad at what has happened. Dreadful, dreadful news.

'It's right we are suspending campaigning activity in this referendum and everyone's thought will be with Jo's family and with her constituents at this terrible time.'

Labour leader Mr Corbyn said: 'The whole of the Labour Party and Labour family - and indeed the whole country - will be in shock at the horrific murder of Jo Cox.

'Jo had a lifelong record of public service and a deep commitment to humanity. She worked both for Oxfam and the anti-slavery charity, the Freedom Fund, before she was elected last year as MP for Batley and Spen – where she was born and grew up.

'Jo was dedicated to getting us to live up to our promises to support the developing world and strengthen human rights – and she brought those values and principles with her when she became an MP.

'Jo died doing her public duty at the heart of our democracy, listening to and representing the people she was elected to serve. It is a profoundly important cause for us all.

'Jo was universally liked at Westminster, not just by her Labour colleagues, but across Parliament.

'In the coming days, there will be questions to answer about how and why she died. But for now all our thoughts are with Jo's husband Brendan and their two young children. They will grow up without their mum, but can be immensely proud of what she did, what she achieved and what she stood for.

'We send them our deepest condolences. We have lost a much loved colleague, a real talent and a dedicated campaigner for social justice and peace. But they have lost a wife and a mother, and our hearts go out to them.'

Labour deputy leader Tom Watson said: 'The whole of the Labour movement is devastated at Jo's death. We have lost a colleague so young who had much more to contribute to public life. She was our future.

'It is hard to comprehend how a compassionate, principled and beautiful person can be taken away from us so cruelly. It's even more devastating because she was doing what she did best - serving her constituents.

'We grieve her loss. Our love and prayers are with Brendan and Jo's family.'

Commons speaker John Bercow said: 'I am absolutely devastated to learn the news about Jo Cox. 

'Jo was an outstanding Member of Parliament and a wonderful, kind, caring person who was liked and respected in all parts of the House.

'My thoughts and prayers are with her family at this harrowing time.'



Mr Cameron said the loss of Jo Cox was a 'tragedy' as he offered condolences to her family, including husband Brendan and their children

 

 

Union Jack flags were seen flying at half mast from the roof of Downing street in London this evening in honour of Mrs Cox

Flags were also flown at half mast outside City Hall in London as a mark of respect for the Labour MP for Batley and Spen

As the nation mourned the loss of the much-loved MP, flags flew at half mast above the Tower of London in tribute to Mrs Cox today 





Egoin installs 'collective custom build' property in Edinburgh

Cruel moment man dumps his dog at the roadside before driving off

Police chief speculates there may not have been a drone at all

Bye Felicia! Hair-larious argument over bus seating arrangements

Teenage Meghan put on scene-stealing performance at Christmas show

Chris Evans thanks fans after final BBC Radio 2 breakfast show

Horrifying CCTV shows hit and run driver plough into young men

Shocking moment out-of-control snow plough hits woman in Russia

Hundreds of people flee amid fears 34-storey building will collapse

Dramatic aerial footage of the Krakatoa eruption in Indonesia

Former Lib Dem leader Paddy Ashdown dies aged 77

Smoke spews out of Krakatoa after eruption reportedly caused tsunami

Theresa May said Mrs Cox was one of the 'brightest and most popular' MPs and the pain her family and friends are suffering is 'unimaginable'.

The Home Secretary added: 'Our thoughts and prayers are with them at this terrible time.

'The full details of what happened outside Jo's constituency surgery in Birstall are not yet clear and until the facts have been fully established I will not comment further.

'It is entirely appropriate that all campaigning for the referendum has been suspended.

'All of us are united in our deep sadness at the loss of one of our brightest and most popular Westminster colleagues.'

Former Labour MP Joan Walley, in whose parliamentary office Mrs Cox had worked before becoming an MP herself, was being interviewed on BBC Radio 4's PM programme as news of her death came in.

A clearly distressed Ms Walley said: 'Nothing has prepared me to be in a situation where I'm live on BBC radio to pay tribute to a really, truly special and compassionate woman, who totally believed in public service, who totally believed in eradicating poverty, who totally wanted to see environmental improvements, with a young family and a whole life in politics in front of her.

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn (pictured tonight right), paid his own tribute to Mrs Cox, as did Home Secretary Theresa May (left)

 

 

Egoin installs 'collective custom build' property in Edinburgh

Cruel moment man dumps his dog at the roadside before driving off

Police chief speculates there may not have been a drone at all

Bye Felicia! Hair-larious argument over bus seating arrangements

Teenage Meghan put on scene-stealing performance at Christmas show

Chris Evans thanks fans after final BBC Radio 2 breakfast show

Horrifying CCTV shows hit and run driver plough into young men

Shocking moment out-of-control snow plough hits woman in Russia

Hundreds of people flee amid fears 34-storey building will collapse

Dramatic aerial footage of the Krakatoa eruption in Indonesia

Former Lib Dem leader Paddy Ashdown dies aged 77

Smoke spews out of Krakatoa after eruption reportedly caused tsunami

Theresa May said Mrs Cox was one of the 'brightest and most popular' MPs and the pain her family and friends are suffering is 'unimaginable'.

The Home Secretary added: 'Our thoughts and prayers are with them at this terrible time.

'The full details of what happened outside Jo's constituency surgery in Birstall are not yet clear and until the facts have been fully established I will not comment further.

'It is entirely appropriate that all campaigning for the referendum has been suspended.

'All of us are united in our deep sadness at the loss of one of our brightest and most popular Westminster colleagues.

'Words can't express what I feel because Jo's life and everything she believed in are so badly needed now.

'My thoughts and prayers are with her family and I just hope all Jo's many family, friends, admirers, whatever political side they are, will unite to think about her, to think about our parliamentary democracy and to think what we can do together to be true to the things she believed in.'

Former international development secretary Andrew Mitchell told PM: 'My thoughts - as everyone across Parliament's will be - are with her husband Brendan and her two lovely little children, who used to come into Portcullis House to have tea with her during the week.

'It is an unspeakable and un-understandable event that has taken place, and Parliament and her constituents will be much the poorer for her passing.

'But it's her family and those two little children who we must be thinking about now.'

Labour MP Jess Phillips said: 'My heart is broken. She was amazing, a brave giant who stood against bullies.'

Foreign Secretary Philip Hammond said: 'Deeply saddened by news of the death of Jo Cox.'

And Scotland's First Minister Nicola Sturgeon said: 'I didn't know Jo Cox but by all accounts she was a brilliant young MP.

'And she was just doing her job. My heart breaks for her family.'









 

 

 

Justin Welby, the Archbishop of Canterbury, paid his own tribute to Mrs Cox this afternoon in Parliament Square, London

MPs from across the country rallied to pay tribute to the popular and much-loved MP. Pictured, First Minister of Scotland Nicola Sturgeon (L) and Leader of Scottish Labour party Kezia Dugdale attended a vigil in George Square, Glasgow





