Luvvies' lament! Bitter stars line up to tweet abuse at 'ill-informed' and 'economically illiterate' decision they feared 

2016-6-24

An angry array of luvvies who had backed Remain attacked the result of the referendum yesterday.

They accused the voting public of being 'economically illiterate'.

Actors, comedians, singers, designers and writers – many of whom had been among the hundreds backing EU membership – branded Leave supporters 'ill informed' as they struggled to accept the verdict. Many posted their views on Twitter.

Gary Lineker

The ex-England footballer wrote: 'It's not a time for triumphalism. Not a time for division. Not a time for hatred. It's a time for change. A time for calm. A time in history,' the BBC presenter said.

'Feel ashamed of my generation. We've let down our children and their children.'

The former England and Barcelona footballer said: 'Feel ashamed of my generation. We've let down our children and their children'

JK ROWLING

The Harry Potter author said: 'I don't think I've ever wanted magic more'. She added: 'Scotland will seek independence now. Cameron's legacy will be breaking up two unions. Neither needed to happen.'

RICHARD BACON

The former Blue Peter presenter tweeted: 'I feel so sad. It's so inward looking. So ungrateful to Eastern European immigrants. So chippy. So economically illiterate. So sad.'

JAMES CORDEN

Comedian Corden, now based in the US where he hosts a TV chat show, said: 'I can't get my head around what's happening in Britain. I'm so sorry to the youth of Britain. I fear you've been let down today x.'

The Harry Potter author said: 'I don't think I've ever wanted magic more'. She added: 'Scotland will seek independence now. Cameron's legacy will be breaking up two unions. Neither needed to happen'

Sentiment: Model Alexa Chung tweeted a simple heartbroken emoji as she joined the long queue of stars to tweet  

 



Trend: Stars including Daisy Lowe have been sharing this Remain image showing the EU stars with one replaced by a teardrop

Stinging: This is Richard Bacon's reaction to the EU referendum vote and said that it was 'economically illiterate' and 'sad' 

HUGH LAURIE

The actor wrote: 'Congratulations exiters. Reverse is across and down, easy on the clutch. First hairline crack in the plasterwork: England fans will be paying 25 quid for a bottle of beer by Monday.'

LORD SUGAR

The Apprentice host said: 'Have you ever made a decision and after it has been set in stone reflect and think what did I do that for? Well watch this space.'

SOPHIE ELLIS-BEXTOR 

The singer tweeted: 'Today I keep looking at my beautiful little boys with such a heavy heart. My country has not been kind to them, I feel. Dark days.'

PHILLIP SCHOFIELD

The This Morning presenter, whose show was cancelled yesterday to allow rolling coverage of the referendum, wrote: 'Just woke up to see the result. Oh my God, what have we done.'

ELLIE GOULDING

The pop star said she was 'heartbroken', adding: 'I truly believe this is one of the most devastating things to happen during my lifetime. I felt a fear I've never felt this morning.'

Comedian Corden, now based in the US where he hosts a TV chat show, said: 'I can't get my head around what's happening in Britain. I'm so sorry to the youth of Britain. I fear you've been let down today

JOAN BAKEWELL

The Labour peer, 83, wrote: 'Wake hoping it was all nightmare. It's not! It's a tragically sad day!'

GRAYSON PERRY

The award-winning artist said: 'Well that's taught us peace loving, country running, money earning, forward looking, liberals a lesson.'

SIR BEN AINSLIE

The former Olympic champion yachtsman said: 'Well, that was one hell of a capsize! Time to right the boat, pull together and get going again #Brexit'.

DAMON ALBARN

The Blur frontman told the crowd at Glastonbury Festival that 'democracy has failed us'. The singer spoke ahead of his performance with the Orchestra of Syrian Musicians on the Pyramid Stage.

'I have a very heavy heart today, because, to my mind, democracy has failed us.

'Democracy has failed us because it was ill-informed. And I just want all of you to know that when you leave here, we can change that decision. It is possible.'

MICHAEL EAVIS

The Glastonbury organiser and his daughter Emily tweeted a picture of a poem that has been put on display at the festival in the wake of the result. 

Written by Jodi Ann Bickley, author of One Million Lovely Letters, it reads: 'It's a day none of us have felt less British. I think we're pretty safe in the knowledge that it's nobody's [sic] here fault.' It ends with the line: 'Goodbye old friend, we'll miss you a lot, our little mate the EU.'

Luvvies had been gushing in their support for Remain, claiming leaving the EU would make Britain less imaginative. An open letter signed by 282 stars – including actors Benedict Cumberbatch, Keira Knightley and Bill Nighy, comedians Steve Coogan and Eddie Izzard and fashion designer Dame Vivienne Westwood – said staying in the EU was vital to Britain's £84.1billion creative industry.

'From the Bard to Bowie, British creativity inspires and influences the rest of the world,' they wrote.

'We believe that being part of the EU bolsters Britain's leading role on the world stage. Let's not become an outsider shouting from the wings'.

Musicians Paloma Faith and Jarvis Cocker, film director Danny Boyle and artists Sir Anish Kapoor and Sam Taylor-Wood also signed the letter, which warned that Brexit will damage the 'vibrancy of Britain's cultural sector'.

Oscar-winning actress Emma Thompson, another Remain supporter, had derided Britain as a 'cake-filled misery-laden grey old island' that would be mad not to stay in the EU. 

Actress Lindsay Lohan tweeted results as they were announced, giving comical comments on UK geography.

When it emerged that the pound was falling ‘after big win for Leave in Sunderland’, the 29-year-old American (pictured) said to her 9.3million followers: ‘Why? prove the UK will not trigger anger by allowing (sunderland) to lower the UK pound – THIS IMPACT WILL CONTROL ALL MARGINS’

She added: ‘#remain where’s Sunderland? Does Sarah Palin live there? Lol’ and followed up with: ‘@BBCBreaking @BBCWorld @BBCNews thank you for explaining where #Sunderland AND #Swindon ARE... #Remain#EUref’

Still struggling with UK geography, she tweeted: ‘#REMAIN Sorry, but #KETTERING where are you?’

Miss Lohan, pictured, added: ‘#bury what’s wrong with you manchester?????? I lived in manchester!! be conscious! #fauxpaux @MaxGeorge @DannyCipriani87 #bury has left manchester WHY?’

 

