'Is this the end of the United Kingdom and the European Union?' How the US media reacted to Leave winning the referendum

2016-6-24

Unsurprisingly, news that Britain has voted to leave the European Union has made the front pages of every major US newspaper.

The New York Times asked whether the European Union and the UK would now be able hold together.

The paper’s London-based reporter Steven Erlanger wrote: ‘Will Britain retreat to become a Little England, nationalist and a touch xenophobic, responding to the voters that drove it to quit the European Union?

Scroll down for videos 

The New York Times front page reports that the 'Brexit outcome rattles fiscal markets'

The New York Times website asked whether the European Union and the UK would now be able hold together

The Boston Globe focused on the effect the decision has on the markets

‘Even more important: Will it even hold together? With Scotland deeply pro-European, pressure will increase for another independence referendum that could bring an end to the United Kingdom.’

He added: ‘Britain, a nation whose storied history has encompassed the birth of constitutional government, global empire, royal pageantry and heroic defense against fascism, is entering unknown territory. The questions about its new path could remain unresolved for years.’

The New York Daily News bluntly reported that ‘the Brits told the European Union to bugger off’, adding that the ‘hard-fought referendum’ was ‘seething with wide-reaching economic and political effects’.

The Los Angeles Times stated that ‘Britain is once again an island’, with the ‘historic vote’ something that ‘could profoundly reshape Europe’s economy’.

The heavyweight Washington Post explained that ‘British voters have defied the will of their leaders, foreign allies and much of the political establishment by opting to rupture the country’s primary connection to Europe in a stunning result that will radiate economic and political uncertainty across the globe'.

The Wall Street Journal front page reports that the pound nose-dives and stocks plunge

The Boston Herald declares that the vote in the UK 'stuns the world' and uses the headline 'Brits quit'

The heavyweight Washington Post explained that ‘British voters have defied the will of their leaders, foreign allies



The Chicago Tribune described the referendum campaign as ‘bitterly divisive’ and stated that British politics was now in ‘disarray’.

It said: ‘Britain voted to leave the European Union after a bitterly divisive referendum campaign, sending global markets plunging Friday, casting British politics into disarray and shattering the stability of a project in continental unity designed half a century ago to prevent World War III.’

The New York Post struggled to marshal the facts, wrongly stating that it was England, and not the UK, that had left the EU.

It said: 'The seismic moves underscore how unprepared Wall Street and financial centers around the world were for England to leave the EU.'  









The homepage of The Seattle Times reported how the British pound has taken a huge tumble

The Los Angeles Times stated that ‘Britain is once again an island’, with the ‘historic vote’ something that ‘could profoundly reshape Europe’s economy’

The Chicago Tribune described the referendum campaign ‘bitterly divisive’ and stated that British politics was now in ‘disarray’

USA Today called the result a 'stunning rebuke'.

It said: 'In a stunning rebuke to the “European project” and their own political class, British voters defied opinion polls and market expectations and chose to leave theby a decisive margin.

'The result – the first time any member of the 28-nation EU has chosen to leave the union – will have repercussions for both Britain and the EU, and perhaps for the global economy, that are difficult to forecast.' 

 

