City bankers left counting the cost after their secret exit polls commissioned to try and profit from the EU referendum results FAILED to predict Brexit 

2016-6-24

City bankers have been left counting the cost of secret exit polls that they reportedly commissioned in order to profit from the EU referendum results after they too failed to predict Brexit. 

It was the second time in a year the polling industry was left in tatters after they were unable to foresee that Britain would leave the European Union. 

The  errors had at one point even seemed to convince Ukip leader Nigel Farage to concede defeat shortly after the polls closed only to change his mind as the results rolled in.

City bankers have been left counting the cost of secret exit polls that they reportedly commissioned in order to profit from the EU referendum results. Pictured are traders on Friday morning in Canary Wharf 







It came after most commentators, and the betting markets, were confident that Britain was set to remain in the EU, and polls showed lead for Remain in the final days of the campaign.

A leading pollster said the eventual result was 'embarrassing' for the industry, coming so soon after a General Election result which was predicted by almost no one.

The polls for the referendum have been generally tight over the past few weeks, with Leave sometimes taking a narrow lead in some surveys.



Betting odds reflected this apparent certainty - at one point yesterday, Remain was standing at 1/9, implying that the chances of leaving the EU were below 10 per cent.

The errors had at one point even seemed to convince Ukip leader Nigel Farage to concede defeat shortly after the polls closed only to change his mind as the results rolled in

Respected blogger Mike Smithson said during the day: 'If Leave does manage to win it'll be a far far bigger polling disaster than at [the General Election].'

However, when initial results began to indicate that Leave could be ahead, the odds began to move sharply, until in the early hours of the morning Leave was declared the winner with 51.9 per cent of the vote.

Peter Kellner, the president of polling firm YouGov, yesterday predicted that Remain would win by more than eight points and said it was almost impossible for Leave to prevail.

Results: The victory for the Leave campaign had not been predicted by most major pollsters

This morning he struck a humble tone, saying on Twitter: 'Seems we are heading for result bad for UK, bad for pollsters and (least important) embarrassing for me.'

The result was not a disaster for every company - the final polls from Opinium and TNS were roughly correct, it emerged.

But it was particularly bad for phone pollsters, who repeatedly record a leave for Remain of ten points or more over the preceding months.

BBC presenter Giles Dilnot joked today: 'Somewhere pollsters are quietly crying like lost little children.'

'Embarrassing': Pollster Peter Kellner admitted that it was a failure to predict the result properly

The false predictions on the result seem to have been partly based on a mistaken assumption that there would be a last-minute swing towards the status quo, as has happened in most other referendums.

The pollsters themselves seem to have come out swinging today - YouGov pointed out that its own surveys tended to be quite close and blamed markets and pundits for being over-confident in their prediction of a Remain vote.

'Understanding the precise mechanics of Leave’s win will take some time,' the company said in a blog post.



'What is clear is that it is a historic mispricing of the risk by the financial markets, the betting markets and the media despite continued evidence from pollsters such as YouGov that the race was close and Brexit was a real possibility.'

One of the very few organisations to have called the result exactly was JP Morgan, whose analysts said last week that Leave was likely to win with a margin of three to five points.

Matthew Shaddick, the political betting boss at Ladbrokes, today defended the odds offered by his own industry and pointed out that they were based on the vast amount of money which was being wagered on Remain.

He wrote in The Times: 'The truth is that bookies do not offer markets on political events to help people forecast the results.

'We do it to turn a profit (or at least not lose too much) and in that respect, this vote worked out very well for us.'

Pollsters launched a major inquiry last year to work out why they had utterly failed to predict the Conservative majority at the General Election.

But they had always said that it would be harder to poll the referendum results because there was no precedent to compare it to.

Some pundits today defended the pollsters' performance - Chris Hanretty of the University of East Anglia wrote: 'They have not performed as badly as they did last year, and remain acutely aware of the potential ways in which their polls can fail.'

 



 

