The Tories will not fight the by-election to fill Jo Cox's seat as a 'mark of respect' to the murdered MP's 'extraordinary public service'

2016-6-17

Former Tory party chairman Grant Shapps said Labour should be given a free run in the by-election to replace Jo Cox as a tribute to her 'extraordinary public service' 

The Conservative Party will not contest the by-election to fill murdered MP Jo Cox's seat in Parliament.

Following a call by ex-party chairman Grant Shapps to leave Labour a free run as a tribute to Mrs Cox's 'extraordinary public service', the Tories announced they would not fight Batley and Spen.

The move, described as a 'mark of respect', is highly unusual but comes after almost 24 hours of fulsome tributes to the mother of two from across the political divide. 

A Conservative Party spokesman said: 'Following the tragic killing of Labour MP Jo Cox, the Conservative Party has decided not to contest the forthcoming by-election as a mark of respect to a much-loved and respected politician.' 



Mr Shapps earlier said: 'My thoughts and prayers with the family of Jo Cox MP, who was just doing her job serving the community she represented for too short a time.

'I hope that in the sad by-election to follow, Jo Cox's constituency is left uncontested as a tribute to Jo's extraordinary public service.'

The Liberal Democrats announced this afternoon they would follow suit. 

Party president Sal Brinton said: '(Lib Dem leader) Tim Farron, myself and the whole Liberal Democrat Party pass our sincere condolences to Brendan, their family and the wider Labour movement. Hate and fear will never win.

'An outstanding champion for the vulnerable and the dispossessed, who represented her community brilliantly, was taken from us all.' 



Mrs Cox was first elected to the Commons in the 2015 general election, beating the Conservatives into second place with a majority 6,057 votes.

Labour would be highly likely to successfully defend the majority in any event. 

Uncontested elections to the House of Commons are rare - generally only happening in the seat held by the Commons Speaker.



Political parties could not forced to withdraw but other parties could unilaterally make the same decision as the Tories not to fight the seat.

A writ to trigger the by-election will be moved by Labour chief whip Rosie Winterton at some point in the days or weeks after the House of Commons resumes following the EU referendum.

Mr Shapps made his call for an uncontested by-election on Twitter after paying a warm tribute to Mrs Cox 

There are no strict rules on when the process must be started but once initiated, the campaign will run for around four weeks.

The last by-election to the Commons was completed yesterday as Labour's Rosena Allin-Khan defended the Tooting constituency vacated by Sadiq Khan following his win in the race to be London Mayor.

After her count was declared overnight, the A&E doctor said: 'My thoughts and prayers are with Jo's husband and her children. She was a proud and passionate campaigner who will be desperately missed.

'Jo's death reminds us that our democracy is precious but fragile. We must never forget to cherish it.

'Thousands of people voted today and we are all here in recognition of our democratic values.' 



