Jeremy Corbyn again insists immigration isn't a problem - but one of his most senior MPs declares for Brexit  

2016-6-16

Jeremy Corbyn (pictured giving a speech this morning) doubled down on claims that the EU's open borders is not a problem today as he insisted immigrants are not driving down British workers' wages

Jeremy Corbyn doubled down on claims that the EU's open borders is not a problem today as he insisted immigrants are not driving down British workers' wages. 

But his argument was undermined after one of his senior MPs declared for Brexit this morning. 

His Shadow Cabinet colleague John Cryer, who chairs the Parliamentary Labour party group of MPs, risked facing the sack after he defied his leader by declaring: 'The EU is not Europe but a political construct imposed on many countries.'

He said he is voting for Britain to leave the EU in next week's referendum, becoming the tenth Labour MP to join the Brexit campaign.

Mr Cryer hit out at the EU for 'undermining democratic governments, weakening national boundaries and handing power to the markets and the corporate world'.

Today Mr Corbyn attempted to get back on the front food in the EU campaign today after facing widespread criticism for failing to convince enough traditional Labour voters of the case to stay in the EU.  



He said previous Tory and Labour governments are to blame for the lax City regulation that led to the banking crash and for eroding workers' rights, leading to insecure employment and undercutting of wages.

The situation has led to unscrupulous employers like Sports Direct employing hundreds of eastern Europeans on zero-hour contracts, undercutting 'good businesses' and forcing a race to the bottom, the Labour leader said.

In a pitch to working class Labour voters who Remain campaigners fear may swing the referendum in favour of Brexit due to concerns over immigration, Mr Corbyn said UK governments past and present have allowed the current situation rather than the EU.

He called for Britain to use its presidency of the European Council next year to push for continent-wide minimum workers' rights and wage levels.

In a speech in Rotherham, South Yorkshire, the Labour leader said: 'Too many voices in this debate are only playing that old trick - the blame game. And when politicians play the blame game, it's usually because they have nothing serious to offer themselves.

Jeremy Corbyn (pictured delivering a speech in Sheffield today) attempted to get back on the front food in the EU campaign today after facing widespread criticism for failing to convince enough traditional Labour voters of the case to stay in the EU

'Those pushing us to leave the EU, Conservative MPs like Iain Duncan Smith, Boris Johnson and Michael Gove, say that more money could be spent on the NHS if we left, they've also promised more money for farming, for fishing, for university research, for tax cuts. They've promised our EU contribution over and over again.

'Now they want to use people's real concerns about the impact of EU migration to turn the campaign into a referendum on immigration.

John Cryer (pictured), chair of the Parliamentary Labour party group of MPs, announced he was voting for Britain to leave the EU 

'It's easy to blame people who come to this country, to blame the outsider, to blame bureaucrats in Brussels. It's also very convenient for politicians too. If you're blaming a scapegoat you're not blaming the people with the real power, the corporate elite and the politicians in government who do its bidding.'

The Labour leader claimed there was 'very little debate' about immigrants driving down wages in the 1950s and 1960s because there were powerful employment and trade union protections.

He went on: 'The veteran Labour MP Dennis Skinner talked yesterday in Parliament about Shirebrook. For many years that site was a coal mine where eastern European miners worked alongside English colleagues, doing the same job, earning the same pay and in the same union.

'Today that same site is owned by Mike Ashley's Sports Direct, where he employs 200 full-time employees and 3,000 people, mainly eastern Europeans, on zero-hours contracts.

'Today we have a deregulated labour market that allows unscrupulous employers to undercut local pay by exploiting migrant workers and undercut good businesses by forcing a race to the bottom.

'So migrants aren't driving down wages. Unscrupulous employers are because the Government allows them to.'

Mr Corbyn spoke as part of a Labour blitz for Remain, with former prime minister Gordon Brown insisting there is 'no road to full employment' if Britain quits the EU.

In a speech to win over the 'anxious majority' who are struggling to make up their minds about how to vote in the June 23 referendum, the ex-Labour leader insisted jobs are safer if the UK remains in.

He told an event in Manchester: 'There is no road to full employment in Britain, there is no road to increasing the number of jobs massively in our economy and getting the jobs of the future that doesn't lead through the European Union.'

 

