'Make Thursday our Independence Day!' Boris Johnson issues rallying cry for Brexit after Sadiq Khan accuses him of 'big fat LIES' and running 'Project Hate' in bitter end to brutal EU debate 

2016-6-21

Boris Johnson last night urged voters to make the EU referendum Britain's 'Independence Day as he was involved in brutal clashes with Sadiq Khan and fellow Tory Ruth Davidson in a crunch TV debate.

Mr Johnson laid into the Remain side for 'talking the country down' by issuing a slew of dire Project Fear warnings about the consequences of cutting ties with Brussels.

But newly-installed London Mayor Mr Khan hit back by accusing him of telling 'lie after lie' and running 'Project Hate', while Scottish Conservative leader Ms Davidson lashed out at him for trying to turn the programme into 'the Boris show'.

The exchanges came as the sides clashed in a BBC special at Wembley Arena likely to have been watched by millions.

Mr Johnson was joined by Tory Treasury minister Andrea Leadsom and Labour's Gisela Stuart for the programme in front of a 6,000 strong live audience.

Alongside Mr Khan were Scottish Conservative leader Ms Davidson and TUC Secretary General Frances O'Grady.

Boris Johnson (pictured) said Dyson founder James Dyson was one of many businessmen in favour of Brexit. Sadiq Khan (right) accused the Leave campaign of telling 'lie after lie' 

The Wembley Arena debate - the last major TV showdown of the campaign - was staged less than 36 hours before voters finally get their say on Britain's membership of the EU

During the bruising slugfest:



Taking to the stage in London last night, Mr Khan said the country would face the 'most important decision for a generation' on Thursday.

A Remain vote would mean people are 'both better off and safer'.

Audience member Maxine Fothergill said she was a small business owner employing 10 staff and told the panellists that her firm was one of many in the UK that were 'stifled' by EU regulation. 

Ms Davidson said she knew the EU was 'a bit frustrating but what it means is you cannot be undercut'.

She insisted that tariffs and taxes would be increased if we were outside the EU.

But Mr Johnson laughed off the idea of tariffs, arguing that Germany sold a fifth of its car output in the UK. 

‘I must say that I think that it was extraordinary to hear that we would have tariffs imposed on us because everybody knows that this country receives about a fifth of Germany’s entire car manufacturing output - 820,000 vehicles a year,' he said.

The teams are debating Britain's EU membership in front of a massive 6,000 crowd

Labour's London Mayor Sadiq Khan is one of the three Remain campaigners taking part last night

‘Do you seriously suppose that they are going to be so insane as to allow tariffs to be imposed between Britain and Germany? 

In some of the most heated scenes of the evening, Ms Davidson accused Mr Johnson of not caring about workers, saying he would not 'guarantee jobs'.

But Mr Johnson said: 'They are back to Project Fear within moments. They have nothing positive to say.'

Gisela Stuart said it was no surprise that big businesses supported Britain staying in the EU and pointed out that former M&S chief Lord Rose, who admitted wages would go up after a vote to leave the EU.

Miranda Grell, who is supporting Remain, said that as a ‘black British woman’ she was grateful to the EU for worker rights introduced by Brussels. She asked the panel: ‘If we leave the EU will this be a slippery slope towards weaker employment and social rights in the UK?’

She told viewers: ‘Big companies like Brussels because they're all lobbying to have their rules imposed and you have to comply with them...the chair of the In campaign, Sir Stuart Rose, from M&S said 'it's not going to be a step change or somebody's going to turn the lights out...wages will go up.’ 

Audience member Miranda Grell, a Remain backer, said that as a ‘black British woman’ she was grateful to the EU for worker rights introduced by Brussels.

She asked the panel: ‘If we leave the EU will this be a slippery slope towards weaker employment and social rights in the UK?’ 

After Mr Johnson claimed that EU membership had stopped the UK Government stepping in to offer assistance to help save the steel plant in Port Talbot earlier this year, Mr Khan shot him down, shouting: ‘One lie after another, after another.’

 Boris Johnson lamenting the EU ban on exporting haggis to the US sent Twitter into overdrive 

Seconds after the debate finished David Cameron tweeted that the Boris Johnson-led Brexit team had shown they had 'no plan' for a post-Brexit Britain

Ms Stuart denied Ms O’Grady’s charge that only staying in the EU can workers’ rights be protected, but she was pounced on by her Labour colleague Mr Khan.

In a bout of red-on-red action, Mr Khan told her: ‘Gisela, you are so wrong. Every time you and I have been in a lobby voting for bills to give workers rights they've been in the other lobby voting against those rights.

‘And let me tell you why you’re wrong, because Priti Patel let the mask slip, Priti Patel has said “if we could just halve the burdens of the EU social and employment legislation’.

‘And let me tell you what that means, it means rights for mums and dads, that means [giving] rights for part-time workers the same as full-time workers; that means rights for workers whose employers; let me tell you what else.

He added: ‘The worst thing for workers is their bosses, business goes out of business, them losing trade and losing jobs. And that’s why we need a healthy economy and Gisa, you should know better.’

Ms Stuart shot back: ‘The most important right is the right to a job and as long as we are shackled to a failing Eurozone, liable to bailout after bailout, we will not succeed.’

Mr Johnson lamented the fact that Britain could not negotiate its own free trade deals while it remained in the EU and pointed out that the EU had yet to secure free trade arrangements with the US, China and India.

Using a Scottish example of why this harmed the British economy, he drew laughter from the 6,000-strong crowd as he told his Ms Davidson: ‘Because the EU is in charge of our trade negotiations we cannot export haggis to America.’

In another sign of blue-on-blue infighting during this bitter EU campaign, the Scottish Tory leader shot back: ‘It’s not the Boris show.’ 

The two sides engaged in angry clashes over immigration and whether Turkey was on an ‘accelerated’ path to join the EU .

Mr Khan told the Leave camp: ‘Your campaign hasn’t been Project Fear. It’s been Project Hate as far as immigration is concerned.

‘You are telling lies. Turkey is not joining the EU. That is scaremongering Boris. You should be ashamed.’

Mr Johnson shot back: ‘The last time I looked it was government policy to accelerate Turkish membership. Is it something they wish to happen in the Year 3,000 or is it something they wish to accelerate? 

'I think it is perfectly reasonable to ask people if they would rather proceed on the basis of government promises on immigration or whether they would rather take back control and instigate a points based system so that the electorate can actually hold the government to account.’ 

Mr Johnson pointed out the current London mayor had previously said that those concerned about immigration should not be accused of prejudice.

TUC general secretary Frances O'Grady says remaining in the EU is crucial in the protection of workers' rights

He added: ‘I am a passionate believer in immigration but it has got to be controlled. When we have numbers running at 184,000 net from the EU, 333,000 net in total and 77,000 coming here without a job it is absolutely time to take back control.’

Mr Johnson insisted people should ‘celebrate’ the contribution made by immigrants, but said it was vital to bring their numbers under control.

‘Look at the pressure large scale immigration is causing to public services and the downward pressure on wages. And look at the way we are forced to push away many people who might contribute mightily to the NHS,' he added.

‘We want an Australian-style points system so we get the people we need.’

Sadiq Khan during the debate

London's Muslim Mayor Sadiq Khan took part in last night's debate despite not eating or drinking anything for more than 19 hours as he observed Ramadan.

His spokesman confirmed he did not take exceptions even though he was one of the six candidates in the high-stakes referendum campaign - the last major TV debate before Thursday's historic vote.

The debate came on the worst possible day for Mr Khan due to the Summer Solstice making it the longest day of the year. Muslims in London are required to fast from 2.40am until 9.24pm.

However it didn't stop Mr Khan going after his predecessor as Mayor of London with gusto, accusing Boris Johnson of telling 'lie after lie, after lie' and running 'Project Hate'. 

Mr Khan became Western Europe's first Muslim Mayor when he beat Tory candidate Zac Goldsmith last month. 

At the start of Ramadan earlier in June the Labour Mayor said he would use the Muslim holy month to 'get out there and build bridges' between the capital's different communities. 

Mr Khan said he hoped that having a London Mayor observing Ramadan would help 'break down the mystique and suspicion' that surrounded his faith. 



At several points during the debate host David Dimbleby had to intervene to try to calm tempers, at one stage telling Mr Khan to 'cool it'. 

Mrs Leadsom said some of the Remain side’s remarks on immigration were ‘not worthy’ of the debate. She added: ‘Free movement does not even allow us to ask people if they have a criminal record. Free movement is creating enormous problems’. 

Ms Davidson took her Tory colleague Ms Leadsom to task over Vote Leave’s ‘blatant untruths’.

‘I think I need to pick up on something Andrea said because I can’t let it stand that you tell a blatant untruth in the middle of a debate two days before we vote.

‘She said 60 per cent of our laws are made in European and it’s simply not true. 13 per cent of our laws, according to the independent House of Commons library that number is 13 per cent. In the last five year parliament it was four – there were four bills out of 121 that came out of Europe.

‘I think there’s a real question here, that you’re being asked to make a decision that’s irreversibly, that we can’t change if we wake up on Friday and don’t like it, and we’re being sold it on a lie because they lied about the costs of Europe, they lied about Turkey’s entrance to Europe, they lied about the European army because we have a veto over that.

‘They put this on their leaflets and they’ve lied about this tonight too and it’s not good enough because you deserve the truth, you deserve the truth,’ she finished to loud applause and banging from the audience.’

Mr Johnson, lashing out at the growing influence of the European Court of Justice, said: ‘Since January 1993 there have been 27 other countries not in the European union that have done better than the United Kingdom in exporting goods into the single market; there have been 21 countries that have done better at exporting services – they include most of the developing economies in the world including India, China and America.

‘The best place for us is to be out of the morass, this supreme legal system and I’m afraid Sadiq Khan is completely wrong – the European Court of Justice is the supreme legal authority in our country and he knows that because he’s a lawyer.

Challenging Mr Khan directly, Mr Johnson told him: ‘You would not deny that, do you deny it?’ 

As Mr Khan stood silently by, Mr Johnson added: ‘The European Court of Justice is acquiring steadily more powers and under the Lisbon Treaty the EU expanded competences by about 45 new areas of competence and the European Court of Justice adjudicating in home affairs matters, in deporting foreign suspects, divorce laws for heaven’s sake – things that have nothing to do with the single market.’ 

Putting the case for Brexit in a rousing final speech, Mr Johnson said: ‘There is a very clear choice between those who speak of nothing but fear about the consequences of leaving the EU, and those on our side who speak of hope.

‘They say we cannot do it. We say we can. They say we have no choice but to bend down to Brussels. We say they are woefully underestimating this country and what we can achieve.

‘If we vote to leave and take back control, I believe this Thursday could be our country’s independence day.’

Tory MP Sarah Wollaston, who defected from Leave to Remain last week complaining about claims over what would happen to the NHS outside of the EU, took part in a separate panel discussion on the programme.

‘The point is I’ve listened to the evidence and it’s absolutely clear that our NHS, our health research will be hit if we leave this and they’ll be hit because there’ll be less money for our services and because it will hit the workforce and it will hit our leadership role in research and development and cooperation with our European partners,' she said.

‘There will be a very serious Brexit penalty for the NHS, make no mistake and if people are caring about the NHS and research when they make their vote I would say vote to remain with our European partners.’  



Mr Khan took part in last night's debate despite not eating or drinking anything for more than 19 hours as he observed the Muslim holy month of Ramadan.

His spokesman confirmed he did not take exceptions even though he was one of the six candidates in last night's high-stakes referendum campaign - the last major TV debate before Thursday's historic vote.

The debate came on the worst possible day for Mr Khan due to the Summer Solstice making it the longest day of the year.

Muslims in London required to fast from 2.40am until 9.24pm.

Mr Johnson and Ms Davidson did not appear to have taken their on-screen dust up too seriously, and were all smiles after the cameras stopped rolling

However it didn't stop Mr Khan going after his predecessor as Mayor of London with gusto, accusing Boris Johnson of telling 'lie after lie, after lie' and running 'Project Hate'. 

Boris vs Ruth on tariffs: 'Do you seriously suppose that they are going to be so insane as to allow tariffs to be imposed between Britain and Germany?'

Ruth vs Andrea on Leave: 'We’re being sold it on a lie because they lied about the costs of Europe, they lied about Turkey’s entrance to Europe, they lied about the European army because we have a veto over that.

‘They put this on their leaflets and they’ve lied about this tonight too and it’s not good enough because you deserve the truth, you deserve the truth,’ she finished to loud applause and banging from the audience.

Sadiq vs Gisela on workers' rights: 'Gisela, you are so wrong. Every time you and I have been in a lobby voting for bills to give workers rights they've been in the other lobby voting against those rights.' 

Ruth vs Boris on jobs: 'Asked if people were going to lose jobs, Johnson said they might or they might not. That's not good enough.

Sadiq vs Boris on immigration: 'Your campaign hasn’t been Project Fear. It’s been Project Hate as far as immigration is concerned.

‘You are telling lies. Turkey is not joining the EU. That is scaremongering Boris. You should be ashamed.'

Mr Khan became Western Europe's first Muslim Mayor when he beat Tory candidate Zac Goldsmith last month. 

At the start of Ramadan earlier in June the Labour Mayor said he would use the Muslim holy month to 'get out there and build bridges' between the capital's different communities. 

Mr Khan said he hoped that having a London Mayor observing Ramadan would help 'break down the mystique and suspicion' that surrounded his faith. 



Earlier, in an apparent sign of nerves in the Remain camp amid polls showing the outcome is still too close to call, David Cameron issued a desperate plea to older voters not to punish him for mistakes in government by sending Britain crashing out of the EU. 

Standing outside the famous 10 Downing Street door earlier, the Prime Minister tried to draw a line under another torrid spell of pressure over his failure to curb immigration, insisting that the economic case for membership was 'paramount'.

The premier said a vote to leave on Thursday would be 'irreversible'. 'I know I haven't got everything right... but of this I am convinced... Britain is better off inside the EU than out on our own.'

Mr Cameron said he wanted to speak directly to 'my generation and older' to think about their children and grandchildren.

'I know Europe isn't perfect, believe me I understand and I see those frustrations. I feel them myself,' he said.

'That's why we negotiated and enhanced our special status - out of the euro, keeping our borders, not involved in ever closer union. We have the best of both worlds.

'So as you take this decision, whether to remain or leave, do think about the hopes and dreams of your children and grandchildren. They know their chances to work, to travel, to build the sort of open and successful society they want to live in rests on this outcome. 



'And remember, they can't undo the decision we take. If we vote out, that's it. It is irreversible. We will leave Europe for good.

'The next generation will have to live with the consequences far longer than the rest of us.'

On Thursday 'it will just be you in that polling booth', he said, 'taking a decision that will affect your future, your children's future, your grandchildren's future'.

He added: 'Our economic security is paramount. It will be stronger if we stay; if we leave we will put it at risk.

'That is a risk to jobs, a risk to families, a risk to our children's future and there is no going back.' 

Mr Johnson claimed EU membership had stopped the UK Government stepping in to offer assistance to help save the steel plant in Port Talbot earlier this year. But Mr Khan shot back: ‘One lie after another, after another.’

Ruth Davidson, Tory Scottish leader, is a passionate pro-EU campaigner 

The three Brexiteers taking part in the Wembley Arena debate were, from left to right, Tory MP and former Mayor of London Boris Johnson, Labour MP Gisela Stuart and Tory energy minister Andrea Leadsom

Data gathered by YouGov for The Times revealed deep splits within Britain on the EU referendum question as different sectors of the population appear set to vote in different ways on Thursday 

Britain is split down the middle with just two days of the referendum battle to go.

As voters prepare to go to the polls on Thursday to decide the future of the nation, YouGov data revealed deep splits across the nation.

While London and Scotland break strongly for Remain, Wales, the Midland and the North look set on a Leave vote.

Voters aged over 50 are leading the charge for Brexit but those aged 18 to 24 are set to heavily back the campaign to keep Britain inside the EU.

The YouGov survey, for The Times, found Leave was slightly ahead at this late stage of the race scoring 44 per cent to Remain's 42 per cent.

And a Survation poll also showed support for staying in the EU shrinking, with the Remain campaign ahead of Leave by a margin of just one per cent.

But an ORB poll for the Telegraph - focused only on those who say they will definitely turn out on Thursday - found Remain ahead by 6 per cent, scoring 53 per cent to 46 per cent.

Lord Sugar slammed for 'utterly unacceptable' claim that Brexit campaigner 'shouldn't tell us British what we should do' because she's from Germany

Infighting has broken out in the Remain campaign after pro-EU Apprentice boss Lord Sugar said a Brexit campaigner should not 'tell us British what we should do' because she is from Germany.

He was attacking Labour MP Gisela Stuart, who is from Bavaria and moved to Britain in 1974 and was representing the Brexit camp in the last major TV debate before Thursday's referendum.

James McGrory, the spokesman for the official Britain Stronger In Europe campaign, said his remarks were 'utterly unacceptable'.

It was an extraordinary outbreak of infighting within the Remain campaign just hours before polls open in Britain's first referendum on EU membership in 41 years.

Ms Stuart, now a British citizen, was representing the Leave campaign alongside Boris Johnson and Tory minister Andrea Leadsom in front of 6,000 people at a high-stakes debate Wembley Arena.

Businessman and Remain backer Lord Sugar took exception at her appearance in the debate, tweeting: 'I find it strange that Gisela Gschaider a 1974 immigrant from Germany is on the Brexit panel telling us British what we should do.'

Tory MP and Leave backer Nadhim Zahawi took exception to the remarks, saying: 'You must withdraw and apologise to Gisela. That is disgraceful. She is as British as you are'

James McGrory, the spokesman for the official Britain Stronger In Europe campaign, said Lord Sugar's remarks were 'utterly unacceptable' 

Businessman and Remain backer Lord Sugar took exception at her appearance in the debate, tweeting: 'I find it strange that Gisela Gschaider a 1974 immigrant from Germany is on the Brexit panel telling us British what we should do.'

He added: 'She immigrated to UK from Germany in 1974. 30 mins ago was advocating that we stop immigration from the EU.'

And after one of his Twitter followers branded him a 'racist', Lord Sugar replied: 'You ignorant fool. How can my comment be classified as racist. Crawl back under your rock'.

Lord Sugar again insisted he was not being racist, pointing out that Ms Stuart is an immigrant who is now arguing against immigration.

In a series of tweets, he said: 'Yes she is (British) now, and has been arguing that we need to curb immigrants from the EU. She immigrated to UK from Germany in 1974.

Tory MP and Leave backer Nadhim Zahawi took exception to the remarks, saying: 'You must withdraw and apologise to Gisela. That is disgraceful. She is as British as you are.'

And former Tory MP Louise Mensch tweeted: '@Lord-Sugar PIG'.

But it was the condemnation of the official Remain campaign that will do the most damage to Lord Sugar.

Mr McGrory tweeted: 'This is utterly unacceptable. I couldn't disagree with Gisela Stuart more but she has every right to say her piece.' 

It's all fun and games! Boris Johnson and Ruth Davidson embrace minutes after mauling each other over Haggis in bruising EU referendum debate 

Boris Johnson and Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson embraced just minutes after mauling each other in a bruising final EU debate last night.

The Tory pair repeatedly clashed in the two-hour debate at Wembley Arena, with pro-EU Ms Davidson interrupting Mr Johnson mid-sentence to tell viewers: 'It isn't the Boris show.

She accused his Brexit campaign of lying and echoed Tom Cruise as she told voters: 'You deserve the truth'. But getting his own back, Mr Johnson used a Scottish example to attack Ms Davidson's argument for staying in the EU.

He drew laughter from the 6,000-strong crowd as he told her: ‘Because the EU is in charge of our trade negotiations we cannot export haggis to America.’

Boris Johnson (right) hugs Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson (left) despite the pair repeatedly clashing during in the two-hour debate at Wembley Arena last night

But as soon as the cameras had stopped rolling, the two rivals - who have both been tipped as future Tory leaders - were seen smiling as they hugged each other on stage.

Ms Davidson, a keen kick-boxer who announced her engagement to partner Jennifer Wilson last month, also laid into her Tory colleague Andrea Leadsom, another Brexit panelist.

She took Ms Leadsom to task over Vote Leave's claim that 60 per cent of our laws originate from Brussels.

‘I think I need to pick up on something Andrea said because I can’t let it stand that you tell a blatant untruth in the middle of a debate two days before we vote,' she said in yet another example of a blue-on-blue attack.

‘She said 60 per cent of our laws are made in European and it’s simply not true. 13 per cent of our laws, according to the independent House of Commons library that number is 13 per cent. In the last five year parliament it was four – there were four bills out of 121 that came out of Europe.

Ms Davidson added: ‘I think there’s a real question here, that you’re being asked to make a decision that’s irreversibly, that we can’t change if we wake up on Friday and don’t like it, and we’re being sold it on a lie because they lied about the costs of Europe, they lied about Turkey’s entrance to Europe, they lied about the European army because we have a veto over that.

‘They put this on their leaflets and they’ve lied about this tonight too and it’s not good enough because you deserve the truth, you deserve the truth,’ she finished to loud applause and banging from the audience.’



Queen said to have been asking dinner guests for 'three good reasons' why Britain should be in EU

The Queen is said to have been asking dinner guests to give her 'three good reasons' why Britain should be in the EU.

Royal author Robert Lacey claimed the monarch has been posing the question to those she entertains privately.

In an article for The Daily Beast website, Mr Lacey wrote: '"Give me three good reasons," she has apparently been asking her dinner companions recently, "why Britain should be part of Europe?"'

A Buckingham Palace spokesman said it would not comment on private conversations.

Buckingham Palace said it did not comment on private conversations and the Queen was 'above politics'

'The Queen is above politics and acts on the advice of her Government in political matters,' the spokesman said.

'The referendum is a matter for the British people to decide.'

Sources pointed out that Mr Lacey did not seem to have heard the question himself, and stressed that there was no claim that the monarch had offered her own views.

The Sun was rebuked by the press regulator in March for suggesting that the Queen favoured leaving the EU.

Asked about the article today, Mr Lacey said: 'The Queen likes a healthy debate around the dinner table. It was just a question.

'She's aware of the complexities for different parts of the UK.

'As we know, she's very careful not to betray whatever her personal opinions may be on this. You can say the same of her husband.'

The claim has emerged at a crucial time in the EU referendum battle, with less than 36 hours to go until the nation votes.

 

 

