Neil Kinnock weeps during TV interview as House of Commons is set to be recalled for tributes to MP Jo Cox

2016-6-17

Lord Kinnock wept during a TV interview today as he spoke of his family's grief at the brutal killing of Jo Cox.

The former Labour leader, who had known the MP for 20 years since she was an aide to his wife in the European parliament, said they were 'struggling to grasp the full meaning'. 

The EU referendum campaign has been put on hold in the wake of the tragic loss of the Labour backbencher, and the House of Commons is set to be recalled for tributes.

Scroll down for video 

Lord Kinnock broke down in tears as he paid tribute to Jo Cox on BBC Breakfast today

The mother-of-two was punched and kicked to the ground by her attacker before being shot three times – once in the head - with what appeared to be an antique gun and stabbed at least seven times with a 'foot-long hunting knife' as she lay helpless on the ground outside a West Yorkshire library.

The married 41-year-old, who was a rising Labour star and dedicated MP, died from the catastrophic injuries she sustained in yesterday's attack, after the killer ambushed her as she walked to her constituency surgery in Birstall near Leeds at about 1pm.

Two hours after her death, her husband Brendan – with whom she has two young children, aged three and five - tweeted a photograph of her and urged people to 'fight against the hatred that killed her.'

In a moving statement, he said: '(This) is the beginning of a new chapter in our lives. More difficult, more painful, less joyful, less full of love.

'I and Jo's friends and family are going to work every moment of our lives to love and nurture our kids and to fight against the hate that killed Jo.'

It came as it emerged that police had been poised to step up security for Mrs Cox, who became an MP last year, as she had been harassed in a stream of abusive messages over the last three months. However, it is understood the additional security measures were for the London houseboat where she lived with her family.

The news prompted an outpouring of grief from MPs from all parties at the loss of a popular colleague.

Speaking on BBC Breakfast this morning, an emotional Lord Kinnock said he had regarded Mrs Cox as a 'beloved neice'

Popular MP Jo Cox, 41, has tragically died after she was shot three times - once in the head - and stabbed repeatedly with a 'foot-long knife' by a man as she arrived for a constituency meeting in Birstall near Leeds yesterday. She leaves behind her husband and two children

Mrs Cox, 41, is pictured with her husband Brendan on election night when she was elected as an MP for the Batley and Spen area (left) and posing happily with her husband on their wedding day (right). The MP was shot and died of her injuries outside a constituency meeting

'We've known Jo since she came to work for Glenys in the European Parliament 20 years ago, and it would be no exaggeration to say that both of us felt about her as if she was a beloved niece, because that's the kind of relationship it was.

'She was a woman of huge intelligence, sparkling. She was merry, she had a marvellous sense of dedicated purpose without any kind of piety or pomposity at all. 

'She was wonderful company but she was also a ferociously effective political activist and she showed that before she became a Member of Parliament and we were hugely proud when she was selected and then elected. 

'We both went up to speak for her and it was obvious then that the community had taken Jo to her heart – just like everybody else did. 

Lord Kinnock with his wife Glenys. Mrs Cox worked as an aide to Lady Kinnock when she was a member of the European parliament

'You've spoken to people from across the political spectrum and you don't produce testimonies like that unless you are quite extraordinary and she certainly was.'

Tears rolled down the face of the former Labour leader as he talked of the impact of the death on his wife.

'Glenys is bereft. Neither of us can really grasp the full meaning. Our immediate thoughts were for Brendan and their beautiful, wonderful kids,' he said.

'It's a death in the family, there's no doubt at all about that – our family, the Labour family, the family of Batley and Spen – because that's the kind of feeling, the response that she nourished. There's a phrase from Shelley, 'a day-star of the age' and Jo Cox was a day-star...

MP Rachel Reeves breaks down in tears at the scene in Birstall market place this morning not far from where Ms Cox was murdered

Labour MP Yvette Cooper was seen wiping away tears as she broke down during the vigil in honour of Mrs Cox who was killed yesterday

'She will be remembered as a burning flame of progress, not in any demagogic way but as someone who identified problems – whether at a constituency level or globally or in Syria or in Africa – and wasn't content until she'd committed herself and could do something.'

Lord Kinnock's son Stephen, the Labour MP for Aberavon, shared an office with Mrs Cox and was also devastated.

The peer said: 'She was the best kind of combination of high intellect and total commitment and she put her intelligence to its best use solving practical problems, and that's why she was such a magnetic person and it's impossible to believe that this appalling act of brutality has taken her away.' 

Parliament - which is due to be in recess until after the EU referendum - is being recalled on Monday to allow MPs to pay tribute to Mrs Cox.

Britain First, a far-right  party, has tonight distanced itself from the attack. The groups' leader Paul Golding (pictured) took to its official website to issue a video  condemning the 'heinous' attack

Eyewitnesses claim the gunman shouted 'Britain first' as he carried out the horrific attack on Mrs Cox.



However, Britain First - a British nationalist political party which campaigns against immigration, multiculturalism and Islam - has now distanced itself from the attack and denied any connection.

The group's leader, former British National Party councillor Paul Golding, claimed the attacker could have shouted 'It's time to put Britain first', as he dismissed eyewitness accounts as 'hearsay'.

The leader of the far right party said: 'She has been out campaigning to keep Britain in the EU and there are people in the area that are against it.

'I don't think it was one of our supporters. We stand in elections and organise protests - we don't encourage this kind of nonsense.

'She has a young family - an attack on a mum like that is disgraceful.

'Whether you agree with Labour, to have had that happen to her on the streets is shocking and an indictment of the state of this country.'

In a video message released following the announcement that Mrs Cox had died from her injuries, he added: 'This is a terrible day for our democracy, for our parliamentary system. Our MPs are the representatives of the people and they have been for over 400 years now.

'So this is a very dark day for our country and for our democracy. We do not know what was said. At the moment, it is pure hearsay.

'It's an attack on a mother, it's an attack on our parliamentary system. It's just a downright act of criminality on the streets of Yorkshire. That's what we believe, that's what we think.

'I hope the person who carried out this heinous crime gets what he deserves.'

Britain First also issued a statement denying any involvement, suggesting that the phrase 'could have been a slogan rather than a reference to our party'.

A spokesman said: 'Britain First obviously is not involved and would never encourage behaviour of this sort.' 



Britain First, which was founded in 2011 by Jim Downson, an anti-abortion campaigner linked to Ulster loyalist militants, is in favour of preserving what it deems 'traditional British culture'.

The movement first attracted attention by protesting outside homes of alleged Islamists. It has also been known to carry out 'Christian patrols' and 'invasions' of British mosques and is known for online activism.

It has contested elections to the House of Commons, the European Parliament and the mayoralty of London, but has not held any elected posts. 

The group is also against immigration - an issue which Mrs Cox has spoken positively about.  It has raised suspicions that her attacker was opposing her political views when he fatally shot her. 







