Osborne goes to ground as his credibility is destroyed: Chancellor is nowhere to be seen, as Tory MPs say his political career is finished 

2016-6-24

George Osborne was nowhere to be seen yesterday as Tory MPs pronounced the end of his political career.

The Chancellor, unlike other leading Remain campaigners, did not appear publicly, limiting himself to several short statements on Twitter.

Brexit supporters said his credibility – and his diminishing hopes of becoming Tory leader – were fatally undermined by his relentless scaremongering during the referendum campaign.

Last night there was speculation in Westminster that Mr Osborne could quit the Treasury as early as next week, having stayed for the immediate aftermath of the referendum.

George Osborne's political career looks all-but over tonight after his 'Project Fear' warnings of economic chaos if Britain voted for Brexit failed to scare voters into backing Remain

Responding to the shock win for Leave this morning the Chancellor tweeted he will do 'all I can to make it work'.

Tory party chairman Andrew Feldman will also quit when the Prime Minister leaves Downing Street later this year, it was announced yesterday.

Shortly after David Cameron's resignation speech, Lord Feldman – one of Mr Cameron's oldest friends in politics – became the first Tory to quit his role.



Mr Cameron has asked him to stay on until the party elects a new leader, expected to take place before the Conservatives' autumn conference in October.

Last night a party spokesman said: 'Andrew Feldman always said that he would serve alongside the Prime Minister for as long as he was needed.

'Lord Feldman will step down when the Prime Minister leaves Downing Street.'

As the chief architect of Project Fear, he claimed Brexit would mean the average pensioner would be £32,000 worse off, families would be £4,300 worse off by 2030, house prices would plummet and the country would plunge into recession. 

He also claimed Leave campaigners were 'economically illiterate'.

The final straw was his attempt to scare the public with an emergency 'Brexit Budget'. This, Mr Osborne claimed, would mean a £15billion cut to the NHS, defence and other priorities and £15billion in tax rises, including a 2p rise in the basic rate of income tax to 22 per cent, a 3p rise in the higher rate to 43 per cent, and a 5p rise in inheritance tax rates to 45p as well as higher fuel duties.

But the last-ditch ploy, which followed a series of worrying opinion polls for the Remain camp, backfired horribly.

Yesterday Tory MP Andrew Bridgen said Mr Osborne 'used up all his credibility' on the 'punishment budget'.

He said there was 'genuine anger' among MPs when Mr Osborne came out 'threatening to go back' on so many manifesto commitments: 'He was like a poker player who went all in. He bet the farm and lost.'

Yesterday Mr Osborne did not appear before the cameras, but wrote on Twitter that it was a 'hard-fought campaign'.

He added: 'It is not the outcome I wanted but I respect the decision of British people and will do all I can to make it work.' Earlier in the day, in the wake of the result being announced, he tweeted that had 'briefed G7 finance ministers and bank governors on outcome of EU referendum. They all respect the decision of the British people.

He added: 'G7 central banks have taken steps to ensure adequate liquidity and to support functioning of markets.'

Last night one Remain MP said Mr Osborne had 'run his course' and was finished. 'He's a spent force. It's over,' the MP said.

'I'm sure he knows that, and there's no chance he'll stand for the leadership'. A year ago, in the wake of the Tory general election victory, Mr Osborne was firm favourite to follow Mr Cameron as the next Tory leader and Prime Minister.

But the last 12 months saw his political stock crash repeatedly, after he was forced to reverse controversial tax credit cuts in last June's Budget, and this year, cuts to disability benefits.

The Brexit camp last night paved the way for sidelining 'toxic' Nigel Farage from future EU negotiations

In the last Parliament, Mr Osborne was hailed as the Cabinet's 'master strategist' and, like his immediate predecessor Gordon Brown he used the Treasury to build a Whitehall empire and dispense political patronage. But the referendum campaign destroyed relations with Brexit Tory MPs, for whom he became a hate figure, much more even than the Prime Minister.

According to one biography of the Prime Minister, Mr Osborne argued with Mr Cameron against including a referendum promise, fearing the consequences. Anthony Seldon wrote that both 'are profoundly irritated by their Eurosceptic MPs, but Osborne is even more pragmatic than Cameron.

'The Chancellor's view is that it is simply not sensible to talk about disengaging from major international institutions in the 21st century – not worth considering it.' On Wednesday Mr Osborne is expected to take PMQs when Mr Cameron is in Brussels for the European Council.

The Brexit camp last night paved the way for sidelining 'toxic' Nigel Farage from future European Union negotiations.

Vote Leave sources said the Ukip leader had tried his best to damage their campaign but would now become an 'irrelevance'.

Mr Farage dominated the airwaves as the vote came in. But it is understood that Vote Leave – the official Brexit campaign group, which includes Boris Johnson and Michael Gove – now want to distance themselves from him entirely.

Britain voted for Brexit despite a relentless campaign of scaremongering by David Cameron and George Osborne. Here Jack Doyle recounts the ten most doom-laden warnings about leaving the EU.

1 Early in the campaign, the PM claimed a vote to leave might mean the jungle camp in Calais moving to the UK, saying there were 'any number of opposition politicians in France who would love to tear up the excellent agreement we have with France'.

2 Pensioners were told by George Osborne that an economic shock of Brexit could knock as much as £32,000 off the value of their retirement nest-egg.

3 Treasury forecasts suggested house prices could take a hit of between 10 and 18 per cent over two years.

4 Annual mortgage costs would go up by £1,000 as a result of Brexit, Mr Cameron claimed.

5 Mr Osborne warned the average household that their wealth would be £4,300 lower by 2030 in the event of a vote for Britain to quit the EU.

6 The Chancellor insisted that Brexit would trigger a year-long recession meaning Britain would lose up to 820,000 jobs within two years.

7 President Barack Obama joined in, claiming that Britain would be at the 'back of the queue' for a trade deal with the US if we voted for leave.

8 European Council President Donald Tusk warned that Brexit could mean the destruction of 'Western political civilisation in its entirety'.

9 Mr Cameron claimed that Britain leaving the EU could mean war and genocide in Europe, arguing: 'Can we be so sure that peace and stability on our continent are assured beyond any shadow of doubt?'

10 The PM warned that Islamic State leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi and Vladimir Putin would be 'happy' if there was a Brexit vote.

 

