Furious EU leader demands Britain makes quick exit after claiming the Tory party feud held 'a whole continent hostage' 

2016-6-24

European leaders have warned Britain to leave the EU quickly and avoid prolonging uncertainty.

The presidents of the EU's main institutions said in a statement today that they expect London to act on the decision to leave 'as soon as possible, however painful that process may be.'

As he demanded Britain make a quick exit from the EU, furious European Parliament President Martin Schulz said the U.K.'s relationship with the EU had been ambiguous, but was 'now clear.'

He added a prolonged exit was 'the opposite of what we need', adding that it was difficult to accept that 'a whole continent is taken hostage because of an internal fight in the Tory party'. 

European Parliament President Martin Schulz has said Europe must not be 'held hostage' by Britain

French President Francois Hollande said the UK's vote to leave the EU must act as a 'jolt' to the bloc to implement the 'profound change' needed to address its troubles

European Council leader Donald Tusk has led the stunned continent's reaction to Brexit insisting: 'what doesn't kill you makes you stronger'

Merkel expressed 'great regret' at the UK's decision to leave the European Union and said the bloc must never forget that the foundation of European unity was the 'idea of peace'

French President Francois Hollande has admitted the EU requires 'profound change' in the wake of the Brexit vote as German Chancellor Angela Merkel expressed her dismay at the result.

Hollande said the UK's vote to leave the EU must act as a 'jolt' to the bloc to implement the change needed to address its troubles - adding he was 'sad' to see Britain sever relations.

Merkel described her 'great regret' at the UK's decision to leave and said the EU must never forget that the foundation of European unity was the 'idea of peace'. 









The four - EU Council President Donald Tusk, Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker, Parliament President Martin Schulz and Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte - said that 'any delay would unnecessarily prolong uncertainty.'

David Cameron has suggested that formal notification of Britain's departure might not come before October.



On Monday, Merkel and Hollande will meet to discuss the vote with Donald Tusk, who earlier insisted: 'what doesn't kill you makes you stronger'.

Newspapers and politicians across Europe have revealed their shock at Britain's decision - just a day after many pleaded with the UK to stay. 

The French President warned the remaining 27 member states that action was needed to reconnect with citizens. 

'The British people have decided to leave. It is a sad decision but one which I respect,' he said.

'The vote puts the European Union in difficulties. It must recognise its shortfalls.

'A jolt is necessary. Europe must reaffirm it values of freedom, solidarity, peace. The EU must be understood and controlled by its citizens. I will do everything to secure profound change rather than decline.'

The International Monetary Fund 'stands ready' to deal with the fallout of the UK's decision to leave the European Union, according to its managing director Christine Lagarde

European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker (pictured) insisted on Friday that Britain's decision to leave the EU was not the beginning of the end for the bloc

Merkel later warned EU member states against drawing hasty conclusions about Britain's decision to quit the bloc, as that risked further splitting Europe.

'We take note of the British people's decision with regret. There is no doubt that this is a blow to Europe and to the European unification process,' she said.

But 'what the consequences of this would be... would depend on whether we - the other 27 member states of the EU - prove to be willing and able to not draw quick and simple conclusions from the referendum in Great Britain, which would only further divide Europe,' said Merkel.

Member states should 'calmly and prudently analyse and evaluate the situation, before making the right decisions together,' said Merkel. 

 Tusk had earlier pleaded for the EU 'to keep our unity as 27' adding that Britain's 'historic' vote to leave the European Union should not provoke 'hysterical reactions'. 



Voters in the UK clearly backed Brexit despite polls previously predicting that the country would remain within the bloc.

Tusk said Britain's 'historic' vote to leave the European Union should not provoke 'hysterical reactions' and added that the EU was prepared for such an outcome

Speaking in Brussels on Friday, Tusk said he was confident in the EU's future, adding that 'what doesn't kill you, makes you stronger.' 

The European Council leader said:  'I am fully aware of how serious, or even dramatic, this moment is politically.

'There's no way of predicting all the political consequences of this event, especially for the UK. But for sure this is not a moment for hysterical reactions. I want to reassure everyone that we are prepared also for this negative scenario. As you know the EU is not only a fair-weather project.

'Today, on behalf of the twenty seven leaders I can say that we are determined to keep our unity as 27. For all of us, the union is the framework for our common future. I would also like to reassure you that there will be no legal vacuum.'

He said that EU law 'will continue to apply to and within the UK' until Britain has formally left the bloc. 

'Until the United Kingdom formally leaves the European Union, EU law will continue to apply to and within the UK. By this , I mean rights and obligations. 

He added: 'Finally, it's true that the past years have been the most difficult ones in the history of our Union. But I always remember what my father used to tell me: What doesn't kill you, makes you stronger.'  



Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte said he 'deeply regretted' the decision but 'European co-operation will have to continue'



European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker insisted on Friday that Britain's decision to leave the EU was not the beginning of the end for the bloc. 

European Parliament President Martin Schulz said Britain's exit from the EU must be done quickly.

Schulz tweeted on Friday that the 'will of voters must be respected. Now need speedy and clear exit negotiation.'

He says the U.K.'s relationship with the EU had been ambiguous but that 'now it's clear.'

Britain has up to two years to negotiate an exit, but EU officials have been insisting on quick and potentially tough negotiations to discourage the 27 other countries in the bloc from wanting to leave. 



The heads of the European Greens party say the European Union needs a reset with the vote to leave in Britain showing that the EU is more divided than ever. 

Joint chairs Monica Frassoni and Reinhard Buetikofer say Friday that 'Europe is more divided and less colourful' and that 'we cannot go on with business as usual.'

They said: 'We need to 'reset' the EU and together make it able to deliver credible solutions, notably to those facing a persistent economic uncertainty and a growing sense of insecurity.' 

As leaders across Europe woke up to the news, France's far-right leader Marine Le Pen changed her Twitter picture to a Union Jack and told her followers the result was 'victory for freedom'.

'As I have been asking for years, we must now have the same referendum in France and EU countries,' she wrote.



As leaders across Europe woke up to the news, France's far-right leader Marine Le Pen changed her Twitter picture to a Union Jack and told her followers the result was 'victory for freedom'

France: However, prominent French far right politician Marion Le Pen declared that the British result was a victory

Germany: The vice chancellor of Germany Sigmar Gabriel was quick to tweet his dismay and the result saying: 'Damn! bad day for Europe!'



Italian Premier Matteo Renzi insisted it was time for 'calm and lucidity' so Europe can set to work restructuring.

Renzi said 'Europe is our home' and 'that of our children and grandchildren.' He added that, today more than ever, 'the house must be remodeled, maybe freshened up, but it's the house of our tomorrow.' 

He said Europe's young people are asking for 'more Europe' to realise dreams and expectations.

Many Italian college graduates, unable to find jobs at home, head to Britain to pursue research or careers in finance and other fields.

Renzi recalled that 'in moments of difficulty, Europe pulls out the best of itself.'

 Margus Tsahkna, of Estonia’s centre-right coalition said Britain had started the break up of Europe and that Russian President Vladimir Putin ‘is drinking champagne’.

European citizens also vented their anger on Twitter, with digs from the French towards ‘Les Anglais’. Many used the hashtag #BonDebarras – good riddance – and one said: ‘The English vote like they cook, it’s diabolical.

France's far-right leader Marine Le Pen changed her Twitter picture to a Union Jack and told her followers the result was 'victory for freedom'. 

This morning, Marion Maréchal-Le Pen, a member of the Le Pen dynasty and an FN MP,  tweeted 'Victory!'

The Le Pens, including the convicted racist and anti-Semite MEP and party founder Jean-Marie Le Pen, are fiercely anti-Europe.

They view an end to the EU as the best way of implementing their anti-immigration and anti-globalisation agenda. 







Germany: Tabloid newspaper Bild expressed their shock at the result with a picture of dejected Remain campaigners with the headline 'Britain OUT' 

France: Liberation featured the picture of a married couple on top of a wedding cake holding Union flags saying 'Britain opts to leave' 

French foreign minister Jean-Marc Ayrault said he was 'sad for the United Kingdom' and that 'Europe will continue but it must react and rediscover the confidence of its peoples. It's urgent.'

Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi said it was necessary to 'change (the EU) to make it more human and more just, but Europe is our home, it's our future.' 

Danish Prime Minister Lars Loekke Rasmussen said 'Denmark belongs to the European Union' and the Scandinavian country has 'no plans to hold a referendum on this basic matter.'

He said being member of the 28-member bloc is 'Denmark's best opportunity to influence the world.'

Referendums across the EU 'must be food for thought,' he said, adding it shows a euroskepticism 'that we as decision-makers must take very seriously.'

In Norway, which is not an EU member, Prime Minister Erna Solberg told Norwegian broadcaster NRK she was confident that the EU would 'find solutions to this.'

Sweden's Prime Minister Stefan Lofven said the bloc now faces 'great challenges' when it comes to economy, migration, climate and security.

And the International Monetary Fund 'stands ready' to deal with the fallout of the UK's decision to leave the European Union, according to its managing director Christine Lagarde.

She urged the UK and EU to ensure a 'smooth transition' to a new economic relationship after the Brexit vote. 

 'We urge the authorities in the U.K. and Europe to work collaboratively to ensure a smooth transition to a new economic relationship between the U.K. and the EU, including by clarifying the procedures and broad objectives that will guide the process,' Lagarde said in a statement.

She added: 'We strongly support commitments of the Bank of England and the ECB to supply liquidity to the banking system and curtail excess financial volatility. We will continue to monitor developments closely and stand ready to support our members as needed.'

Italian Prime Minister Matteo Renzi (pictured) said it was necessary to 'change (the EU) to make it more human and more just, but Europe is our home, it's our future'



Meanwhile Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte said he 'deeply regretted' the decision but 'European co-operation will have to continue'.

He added that Brexit 'appeared irreversible but the process to leave may take a long time' and 'may not start until after the German elections' which are due between August and October 2017. 

Rutte also dismissed right-wing politician Geert Wilders' call for a Dutch vote on the EU, saying 'I don't think the Dutch are currently interested in having a referendum on that.'

The prime minister says the Dutch understand that 'cooperation with other countries in a common market ... is vital for our country.'

Pope Francis has said the British decision to leave the European Union reflects the will of its people and that Britain and the rest of the continent must now work to live together.

Francis told reporters en route to Armenia on Friday that the decision places 'a great responsibility on all of us to guarantee the well-being of the people of the United Kingdom.'

Pope Francis has said the British decision to leave the European Union reflects the will of its people and that Britain and the rest of the continent must now work to live together

He said it also will require all to 'take responsibility for the well-being and coexistence of the entire European continent.'

The Vatican has supported the European project from its inception, seeing unification as a way to improve social and economic standards and solidarity. 

While officially taking a neutral position as Britain debated whether to leave, Francis' demands that Europe welcome in more migrants put him squarely at odds with the Brexit camp.

He was one of a number of European leaders to voice their shock at the result this morning. 





German vice chancellor Sigmar Gabriel branding the move a 'bad day for Europe'.

Gabriel, who is also Germany's economy minister said on his official Twitter account: 'Damn! A bad day for Europe!' 





Germany's foreign minister said Britain's decision to leave the European Union is 'truly sobering' news.

Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier said that 'it looks like a sad day for Europe and for the United Kingdom.'

German officials have repeatedly said that they wanted Britain to remain in the EU. 



Denmark: Politiken also opted for a picture of two dejected Remain supporters holding their heads in shock 

Belgium: The website of national newspaper Le Soir also chose to illustrate their shock at the result chosing a picture of a Remain supporters looking worried 

Italy: Corriere della Serra were running a Brexit special and summed up their coverage with a picture of a jubilant Nigel Farage 

Meanwhile former Finnish prime minister Alexander Stubb predicted the result would mean chaos on the continent.

He wrote on Twitter: 'Please tell me I'm still sleeping and this is all just a bad nightmare!

'Usually these things advance in three stages 1. Crisis; 2. Chaos; 3. Sub-optimal solution. Don't know where we are at this stage.'

Meanwhile the result also triggered Dutch far-right MP Geert Wilders to call for a referendum on EU membership in the Netherlands.

Wilders, who is leading opinion polls, said if he is elected prime minister in March he will force a vote.

He said in a statement: 'We want to be in charge of our own country, our own money, our own borders and our own immigration policy.

A television channel shows the front page of the Daily Mail with the headline 'WE'RE OUT!' while traders watch their screens at the stock exchange in Frankfurt, Germany

'As quickly as possible the Dutch need to get the opportunity to have their say about Dutch membership of the European Union.

'If I become prime minister, there will be a referendum in the Netherlands on leaving the European Union as well. Let the Dutch people decide.' 

German tabloid Bild, who yesterday offered 11 hilarious reasons for Britain to remain, posted on their website a picture of dejected Remain supporters with the headline: 'Britain Out.'

'The British referendum must lead to a reform of the European Union!'

It went on to list eight things it must do to become 'adorable' again, including cutting back on bureaucracy, EU Commission costs and putting an end to the 'circus' of having the EU parliament sit in Strasbourg as well as Brussels. 

Belgian newspaper Le Soir featured a picture of a married couple on top of a wedding cake holding Union flags, declaring 'Britain opts to leave.'

Danish newspaper Politiken also featured a picture of shocked Remain supporters.

Meanwhile the website of Italian newspaper Corriere della Serra and Spanish website El Pais featured a jubilant picture of leading Leave campaigner Nigel Farage. 

 





