'It's a great thing. The UK public have taken back their country': Trump praises Britain for voting to leave EU as he says it's 'too bad' that Cameron has resigned

2016-6-23

Presidential hopeful Donald Trump said it is a 'great thing' that the people of the UK have 'taken back their country' in voting to leave the EU, as he touched down at his golf resort in Scotland today.

The billionaire arrived in his 'Trump'-emblazoned helicopter at the Turnberry resort in South Ayrshire with his family to officially open the revamped resort he bought in 2014, just an hour after Prime Minister David Cameron said he intended to stand down in October.

When asked his opinion on David Cameron announcing he is to step down, Trump said: 'Well, that's too bad.' 

While he was speaking at the ninth hole of his golf course, the billionaire was interrupted by British comedian/prankster Lee Nelson, who held up several swastika-emblazoned golf balls and tried to hand them out to the crowd. 

Scroll down for video 

Donald Trump arrived in Scotland to visit his Turnberry golf resort. He was joined by his daughter Ivanka (left) and sons Don Jr and Eric

The Donald praised his mother, who was born in Scotland, his children who manage his business affairs and the golf course itself, dismissing complaints from Republicans that he should stick to the campaign trail at home. Above, Ivanka at the resort in Ayrshire today

Presidential hopeful Donald Trump said it is a 'great thing' that the people of the UK have 'taken back their country' in voting to leave the EU, as he touched down at his golf resort in Scotland today

Trump children (l to r) Donald Trump Jr, Eric and Ivanka were in attendance at the resort's official opening

The Presidential hopeful is on a two-day visit to Scotland

Nelson, real name Simon Brodkin, hit the headlines last year when he showered former Fifa president Sepp Blatter with fake money.

Trump shouted 'Get him out of here!' before security personnel led him away, while Nelson grinned to camera, saying the balls were 'available in the clubhouse as part of a new Trump Turnberry range'. 

Nelson, who was wearing a Trump Turnberry sweater, added: 'Sorry Mr Trump. I forgot to hand them out!' 





Earlier, Trump had given a thumbs-up as he left his helicopter and shook hands with workers on his way to the hotel before making the comments about the EU referendum result.

Asked about the British vote, Trump said: 'They took back control of their country. It's a great thing.' 

British comedian/prankster Lee Nelson held up some swastika-emblazoned golf balls while Trump gave a speech on the ninth hole

Nelson, real name Simon Brodkin, hit the headlines last year when he showered former Fifa president Sepp Blatter with fake money. He is seen above being led away by security personnel

The Donald exclaimed, 'Get him out of here!' before Nelson was escorted away

Nelson jokingly said the balls were 'available from the clubhouse as part of a new Trump Turnberry range'. His proximity to Trump (circled) can be seen above

The people of the United Kingdom have exercised the sacred right of all free peoples. 

They have declared their independence from the European Union, and have voted to reassert control over their own politics, borders and economy. 

A Trump Administration pledges to strengthen our ties with a free and independent Britain, deepening our bonds in commerce, culture and mutual defense. 

The whole world is more peaceful and stable when our two countries – and our two peoples – are united together, as they will be under a Trump Administration.

Come November, the American people will have the chance to re-declare their independence. 

Americans will have a chance to vote for trade, immigration and foreign policies that put our citizens first. 

They will have the chance to reject today’s rule by the global elite, and to embrace real change that delivers a government of, by and for the people.

I hope America is watching, it will soon be time to believe in America again.

'People are angry, all over the world, they're angry,' he said. 'They're angry over borders, they're angry over people coming into the country and taking over. Nobody even knows who they are. They're angry about many, many things.' 

Meanwhile, Trump posted a statement on Facebook promising close ties between the U.S. and UK if he becomes President, saying: 'A Trump Administration pledges to strengthen our ties with a free and independent Britain, deepening our bonds in commerce, culture and mutual defense'. 

Asked if he meant in the United States or United Kingdom, Trump said: 'There's plenty of other places. This will not be the last.' 

And speaking at a press conference at the golf course today, he said: 'This is a very historic day for a lot of reasons - not only for Turnberry. This is one of the big votes in the history of Europe, Scotland, everywhere. So I wish everyone a lot of luck.' 

Hundreds of campaigners hope to create havoc by besieging the Trump Turnberry Hotel, while a plane trailing a banner with the message 'Love Trumps Hate' will greet the controversial billionaire's arrival. 

And now that Britain has voted to leave the European Union after a historic referendum, Mr Trump could be met with another layer of resentment.

While Scots voted overwhelmingly for remaining part of the EU, voters in England and Wales swung the result for Leave. 

Hundreds of campaigners hope to create havoc by besieging the Trump Turnberry Hotel, while a plane trailing a banner with the message 'Love Trumps Hate' will greet the controversial billionaire's arrival

The billionaire arrived in his 'Trump' emblazoned helicopter at the Turnberry resort in South Ayrshire to officially open the revamped resort he bought in 2014, just an hour after Prime Minister David Cameron said he intended to stand down in October

As the result sent the financial markets into meltdown, the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland said that the decision would 'create a sense of shock in Britain's boardrooms'. 

Upon his arrival, Mr Trump was greeted by a pair of bagpipers and dozens of resort staff members wearing 'Make Turnberry Great Again' hats. 

This is Trump's first international trip since sealing sufficient delegate support to be the GOP standard-bearer this autumn. 

The timing of the trip has raised eyebrows among some fellow Republicans as it comes amid a rocky stretch for his campaign.

Trump isn't slated to meet with any political leaders while in Scotland.

The tycoon arrived for the reopening of Trump Turnberry following a £200million ($270m) refurbishment. 

But police have tightened security after the Scotland Against Trump group announced it would be running bus-loads of protesters to the invitation-only event.

Trump was greeted by supporters before he made his comments on the EU referendum result

Upon his arrival, Mr Trump was greeted by a pair of bagpipers and dozens of resort staff members wearing 'Make Turnberry Great Again' hats

The presumptive Republican nominee for US president landed in Scotland today surrounded by his family - son Eric Trump (r), granddaughter Kai Trump and daughter Ivanka Trump (l)

Mr Trump has stoked up inter-national fury after proposing policies including building a wall across the US border with Mexico and temporarily banning Muslims from entering America.

A second group, Stand Up To Trump, claims the presumptive Republican candidate is not welcome here after he 'ramped up levels of racism, Islamophobia, and bigotry' during his presidential bid. 

It has gathered almost 587,000 signatures on a petition calling for him to be banned from entering the UK.

 Twitter reaction to Trump's views on Britain voting to leave EU















A small group of anti-Trump protesters gathered near the golf course in South Ayrshire

Trump Turnberry has been hit with a series of poor reviews ahead of its grand opening today.

More than a quarter of those who have posted reviews of the resort on TripAdvisor have rated their stay as either 'poor' or 'terrible'.

Although the resort is not officially open, the reviews are thought to have been left since its non-official 'soft' reopening on June 1.

One British tourist rated his stay last week with one star out of five, saying he was not allowed to check in until 11pm and served a 'terrible meal'. He also claimed his room had no curtains or blinds.

He added: 'The setting of the hotel and the sunsets are all just so special that if the management get this hotel right, they get the right chef and management, then this will be one of the best in the world.

'So please sort it out. Sorry is just not good enough, I am sorry to say.'

A visitor from New York, who was also there last week, rated his stay 'poor'. He admitted that the redesigned golf course was 'one of the best in the world' – but said he had to wait 75 minutes for a meal in an empty restaurant.

A tourist from Wisconsin rated the hotel as 'poor', adding that he 'would never stay here again or recommend it to anyone else'.

In spite of the low-scoring reviews, however, a number of guests have awarded the destination five-star reviews since it was reopened.

A spokesman for the resort said: 'Trump Turnberry is one of the world's most opulent luxury retreats and we pride ourselves on the quality of our service.

'We expect every guest to thoroughly enjoy their experience with us.

'When issues do arise, as can happen at any hotel, we taken even the smallest concern extremely seriously.'

Mr Trump endorsed Brexit at the start of June, making his strongest intervention yet by saying voters should support the Leave campaign.

He had already been engaged in a war of words with David Cameron over his policy on Muslims after the Prime Minister branded him 'stupid' in the House of Commons.

Cameron had attempted to build bridges with the presumptive nominee ahead of his official confirmation as the Republican candidate at the party convention next month.

Mr Trump previously said he would be tempted by Brexit if he was a British voter but then went further in an interview with The Hollywood Reporter in early June.

Asked whether he would back Brexit, Mr Trump appeared confused by the term before adding: 'Oh yeah, I think they should leave.'



After a ribbon-cutting ceremony this morning, Mr Trump will then fly north to Aberdeenshire tomorrow to visit the course he opened in 2012. He was able to do so after winning a bitterly fought battle to bulldoze coastal dunes which were legally protected because of their ecological value and rarity.

There will be little respite from protests, however, as two of his neighbours and bitterest foes – David Milne and Michael Forbes – have erected Mexican flags on their homes in plain view of Mr Trump's clubhouse and golf course 'to show solidarity with the Mexican people'.

Among the organisations objecting to Mr Trump's visit are Stand Up to Racism Scotland, the Glasgow Campaign to Welcome Refugees and Unite the Union Scotland.

Keir McKechnie, spokesman for Stand Up to Racism Scotland, said: 'His message of hate is one that we'll challenge and we would not encourage anyone to support him in his presidency.

'Although this protest happens to be taking place in Scotland, we want to represent people across the whole of the UK and beyond who reject Trump's racism and Islamophobia.'

A separate group, 38 Degrees, is behind plans to fly a plane trailing an anti-Trump message over Turnberry around midday during the resort's reopening ceremony.

Almost 14,000 members of the group have signed a petition calling on Mr Trump to meet Edinburgh's Muslim leaders 'to educate himself about the religion'.

Kathryn Stribley of 38 Degrees said: 'Donald Trump's views have shown him to be way out of line with the values that 38 Degrees members – and most people across the UK – hold. 

'We're part of a movement building peace and respect in our country. We'll do all that we can to make sure he hears that message during his visit to Scotland.'

Political leaders across the UK have ruled out meeting the presidential hopeful during his trip.

First Minister Nicola Sturgeon has branded his comments on Muslims 'repugnant' and 'offensive'.

This week, David Cameron said that he 'has no plans' to meet Mr Trump during his visit.

The tycoon is due to arrive by private jet for the reopening of Trump Turnberry, pictured, following a £200million refurbishment

Trump on a previous visit to Turnberry. Trump has stoked up inter-national fury after proposing policies including building a wall across the US border with Mexico and temporarily banning Muslims from entering America

Scotland Against Trump co-ordinator Jonathan Shafi told the BBC: 'We'll be organising a protest which will reflect the broad opinion of Scots that his values are incompatible with ours.'

Mr Shafi added that Mr Trump's brand is 'damaging to the Scottish economy'.

But Christina Auld, owner of the Links Lodge near Turnberry, insisted that he is 'good for the area'. She said: 'I think the whole village is looking forward to him coming here. He's made amazing changes to the hotel. He's bringing in a lot of revenue. I just think he's going to make a great difference to the area.'

A Police Scotland spokesman said: 'We have consulted with a number of protest groups in order to facilitate peaceful protest. This will be policed appropriately on the day.'

 

