Now is OUR chance to leave too: Voters in Sweden, Denmark and Greece demand their say on 'broken' Europe but Austria and Germany are devastated

2016-6-24

Britain's decision to leave the EU will pave the way for Greece, Sweden and Denmark to do the same, voters across Europe said today.

But Germans and Austrians  were largely horrified by the UK's decision to sever ties with Europe - while France was split down the middle.

MailOnline went out on to the streets of major capitals across the continent in the wake of the shock Brexit result and found messages of congratulations meshed with 'horror' at the political earthquake that has taken place.

Konstantina Mpoikou, 26, PhD Student said: 'I don’t believe anything will drastically change regarding the British way of living, but things are going to get tougher for European citizens and the EU itself'

Nathalie Blanchard, 50, an advertising executive from Paris, was very clear in her disapproval: ‘It’s a catastrophe. There will be an economic crash across Europe' 

Danish designer Mia Lindbirk told MailOnline: 'We might also end up with a no in Denmark, if we have an election' while Markus English, a student at Vienna University said: 'I fear it could be the start of a complete disentegration of the most important political project of the past 50 years'

In Sweden, where the anti immigrant/right wing party the Swedish Democrats has seen increasing support, there was great interest in Brexit.

Elias Köhler, 22, said: 'It is exciting and interesting that the UK have voted to leave the EU. The consequences will be enormous for the rest of Europe as well. The continent will be divided since the other European countries will look at Britain with contempt.

'My main objection towards the EU is the high cost we in Sweden have to pay to stay in. I also think that a big issue is that the member countries immigration policy is so divided.'

Björn Dahlgren, 30 years old, added: 'This is a positive opportunity for the EU. 

'They can correct everything that is wrong in their system such as their lack of democratic insight for its citizens and all their strange laws.

'The distance between Brussels and Europe´s citizens is enormous; that is something that needs to be dealt with.

'I think Sweden should leave the EU. The disproportionate amount of money that is being sent to support agriculture is my main objection.'

Cecile Heinrich, 22, a student in France, said: ‘I really don’t think Brexit is a good idea. ‘I think it will have serious consequences for France. We are so close to Britain, we do a lot of trade with Britain, it is an important neighbour' 

Tarangeet Singh, 25, left, unemployed, received political asylum in Austria two years ago: 'I wish for every member country to stay in the European Union. We are more strong together than as individual states.' However, Björn Dahlgren 30, from Sweden, strongly disagreed: 'I think Sweden should leave the EU. The disproportionate amount of money that is being sent to support agriculture is my main objection'

Julie Tarranova, 27, a jewellery maker from Paris, said: ‘The UK already feels like abroad. I don’t think this [Brexit vote] changes anything'

Financial consultant Sebastian Mazurkiewicz said Brexit 'is not the end of the world' in Paris while management consultant Frank Reymond, also from Paris, said: ‘This is not good for Europe. No one knows what will happen'

However Jamilla Eliassi, 24 years old strongly disagreed: 'I think it is sick that the UK has voted to leave. They are shooting themselves in the foot. Why stand alone instead of united with your neighbours.

'Sweden should stay inside the union. Nations should work together and help each other.

'There are of course problems with the EU, the enormous and slow bureaucracy is upsetting.'

Mohammad Keshavarz, 60, added: 'I think it is very sad that they have decided to leave the union. Everything becomes very uncertain now.

'I think we should still be members of the EU. We are a small country and need to cooperate. But we should keep our own currency.

'The negative things I can see regarding the EU is the costs for the enormous bureaucracy in Brussels.'

In Greece, there were calls to follow Britain and walk away from the EU.

Florist Eleni Papadakis, 33, and a mother of one, said: 'I support Britain’s decision just like I supported Greece’s exit last year. The European Union is not a union anymore. 

'It is just a couple of rich countries trying to get everything they can from the poorer ones. I don’t believe that any Greek government will ever take the leap and leave the EU; they are terrified. However, I strongly believe that some serious internal conflicts will definitely come up in Britain.' 

Konstantina Mpoikou, 26, PhD Student said: 'I don’t believe anything will drastically change regarding the British way of living, but things are going to get tougher for European citizens and the EU itself. 

'This move will definitely shake the grounds the united Europe idea was born on, and more and more countries will follow. Maybe someday Greece too. 

'The Eurozone was already weak. Now it’s just getting weaker. Why would a weak country want to remain in a weak union?'

Florist Eleni Papadakis, 33, and a mother of one, said: 'I support Britain’s decision just like I supported Greece’s exit last year. The European Union is not a union anymore'

'Shock': NHS Occupational Therapist Agata Farquherson, 30, from Lublin, but lived in London for 10 years, said: 'I am shocked and very disappointed. 'It's a very bad day'

In Paris, Britain was accused of never being a proper part of the EU in the first place.

Sebastian Mazurkirwicz, a financial consultant said: ‘There will be a reaction to the Brexit vote but it is not the end of the world.

‘The markets have fallen and the pound has gone down but both of them will recover.

‘The UK is not in the Euro. Europe has been in trouble for a long time. It is not connected to the people.











‘There is a democratic deficit. No one votes for the people in power [in Brussels].

‘If there was a referendum [on leaving the EU] in France today the people would vote to leave.’

Julie Tarranova, 27, a jewellery maker, said: ‘I don’t care. The UK already feels like abroad.’

‘I don’t think this [Brexit vote] changes anything.

‘Already the UK has different money  which is annoying when I go there to buy stock.



However Nathalie Blanchard, 50, advertising executive, was very clear in her disaproval: ‘It’s a catastrophe. There will be an economic crash across Europe.

‘This is a step backwards, it is really sad.

Björn Dahlgren, 30 years old, added: 'I think that this is a positive opportunity for the EU. They can correct everything that is wrong in their system'

Mohammad Keshavarz, 60, from Sweden, told MailOnline: 'I think it is very sad that they have decided to leave the union. Everything becomes very uncertain now'



‘Even though the UK is not in the Euro or in the Schengen area [of free movement] Britain is an important part of the EU.

‘Europe will suffer as a world power without the UK.’

Frank Reymond, 57, management consultant: ‘This is not good for Europe. No one knows what will happen.

‘There is a two-year process for leaving the EU so we can only wait and see what will come out of that. But I believe this [Brexit] vote is bad for Britain and bad for Europe.’

Cecile Heinrich, 22, student, said: ‘I really don’t think Brexit is a good idea.

‘I think it will have serious consequences for France. We are so close to Britain, we do a lot of trade with Britain, it is an important neighbour.

‘I have friends who work in London so who knows what will happen to them.’







In Denmark,  public opinion in Aarhus, the second biggest city, opinion was also sharply divided.

Carsten Hartmann, 45 years, construction worker, said: 'It's great Britain is leaving. They have taken the first step, and we will follow. 

'The EU is a state in the state. Everything is dictated from the EU, and it costs us a lot of money. I believe Denmark can manage without the EU.

Jamilla Eliassi, 24, from Sweden, did not support Brexit: 'I think it is sick that the UK has voted to leave. They are shooting themselves in the foot. Why stand alone instead of united with your neighbours.



'It might be difficult, but Britain will get an agreement with the EU, and I'm sure it will work out fine. The world is not coming to an end because Britain has left.'

Kenneth Poulsen, 37 years, a sales and marketing manager, added: 'I'm not surprised, but I think it's bad for Britain. 

'It seemed like the more the politicians and the media argued for a yes to the EU, the more the population turned against them. 

'People forget that it is because of the EU we don't have wars and a lot of things work. We' re going to see a different EU, this is just the beginning. 

'I don't think, Denmark will leave because we're too small to stand outside. But if we had an election in Denmark, people might also vote against the EU.'

At 78, Lilian Vangberg, had huge reservations about walking away: 'I think it's a pity that Britain is leaving. It's like Europe is falling apart, and I'm afraid where it will end. 

'I'm also afraid that Denmark will also try to leave the EU. I don't like borders and I think, we should stick together.'

In Austria, there was widespread disapproval over the Brexit vote

Silke Trapp, a 47-year-old IT-consultant, said: 'I'm absolutely shocked. I work for a US IT-company with European headquarters in London. The Brexit is a complete disaster. 

'I can hardly find the words to describe how I feel about it. 

'I have no idea what will happen next, but the company probably needs to be organized differently as a consequence.

'The UK have always had a special status within the EU. They were always more sceptic than other member states, but I had never expected a leave vote. 

'I think the remain side simply failed to explain all the positive things about the EU to its population. It was a failure on their part.

Markus English, 22, a student at Vienna University said: 'I fear it could be the start of a complete disentegration of the most important political project of the past 50 years.

'It was a great mistake to ask the British people. The timing was terrible, with the refugee crisis completely overshadowing all the good results the EU has created. 

'In my view the decision should have been made by elected officials, not by way of a referendum.'

Christina Thummer, 22, who works in tourism in Vienna, said: 'There could be a domino effect, if it goes well for the UK. I hope it never comes to that in Austria' 



Silke Trapp, a 47-year-old IT-consultant, said: 'I'm absolutely shocked. I work for a US IT-company with European headquarters in London. The Brexit is a complete disaster' 



Tarangeet Singh, 25, unemployed, received political asylum in Austria two years ago:

'I wish for every member country to stay in the European Union. We are more strong together than as individual states. 

'I was very surprised to hear that UK voted to leave. I only hope this won't make other countries leave too. I personally worry about how this could affect free movement within Europe. The Sikhs live all over the world. 

'I have a sister who lives in England. I don't know if this could make it more difficult for us to maintain close relations, but I worry about it.

Josef Glanzer, 57,  a technician with international plant construction firm added: 'This is very, very bad new to all Europeans. Economically and politically it will damage Europe severely, I think. My biggest fear is that the Brexit will destabilise the entire EU.

'I fear the pressure for referenda in other member states will increase now - it's an alarming  development. I don't expect - or support - an Austrian referendum.

Christina Thummer, 22, who works in tourism: 'There could be a domino effect, if it goes well for the UK. I hope it never comes to that in Austria. We would be much worse off without the economic co-operation within the EU.'

In Germany, Rita Seeburg, 56, a cleaning lady who grew up in East Berlin under the communists, said: 'I think the British have made a great mistake. 

'Any club is strong when the membership remains together. I think their leaving will only weaken Germany, German jobs and the euro in the long term.'

Dieter Wehmeyer, 44, a barman, said: 'We gave up on referendums in Germany after Hitler because the populist vote is too easily manipulated.

'I think Britain voted for an image of itself that hasn't been a reality for several decades. Just what do these Brexiteers thjnk their vote will bring. Crazy. But its your decision and you will have to live with it.'

Eberhard Seletzky, 52, a car salesman in west Berlin, said: 'Extraordinary. I don't think this was a vote about the EU at all but an explosion of hatred towards an elite both in London and in Brussels. 

'But then again, Britain never had the longing for the EU project that we on continental Europe have.  

'I think it an act of immense self harm. But the EU will survive and I think the UK will be the poorer for leaving it.'

Public opinion on Brexit was further divided in neighbouring Ireland, where some spoke of their concern surrounding the border between Northern Ireland and the Republic. 



Brendan Kernan, 62, from Lusk in Dublin, said: ‘It’s a possibility that people might start coming to Ireland to go onto the UK. We don’t have great connections to Europe other than Rosslare port or the airports. 

Carsten Hartmann, 45 years, a construction worker in Copenhagen said: 'It's great Britain is leaving. They have taken the first step, and we will follow'

‘The free area between ourselves and the UK needs to be strengthened. Our order posts, if we want to keep the free movement between Northern Ireland and ourselves, we will need to strengthen our border controls between ourselves and the rest of Europe.’

Mr Kernan also said the referendum result could reignite trouble in the North.

He said: ‘What is more concerning for us directly is the potential for the Northern Ireland situation to deteriorate because they certainly have one side being polarised as being back in the UK and the other side are kind of hoping for a united Ireland. That might be a cause for concern.’ 



Bank employee Alison Farrell said it is likely immigrants will look to Ireland as a way of getting to the UK following the shock Brexit vote.

Ms Farrell, 24, from Mount Merrion in Dublin, said: ‘I think they should have stayed in the EU. Immigration is obviously a big problem for them and I can see why they wouldn’t want to have that many people coming in. It impacts on the economy. 



Mr Casey, 30, from Celbridge in Kildare, added: ‘For immigration, I don’t think it will be a big concern for us. It’s not really been an Irish problem up until now so I don’t see it being an issue for us.

‘The immigration issue and the move to the right [in the UK] is also kind of worrying.

‘I’d be more concerned between the border between north and south because that could become an issue again.' 





