Churchill wouldn't have wanted us to make the 'terrible mistake' of quitting the EU, says wartime Prime Minister's grandson

2016-6-21

Winston Churchill's grandson has dismissed the idea that the wartime leader would vote for Brexit in the EU referendum.

Sir Nicholas Soames insisted it was not a 'sensible idea' to diminish our influence and undermine security by cutting ties with Brussels.

But the Tory MP said he feared the country was on the 'verge of making a terrible mistake'. 

The warning came with just two days to go before the crucial referendum on whether we should stay in the EU or not.

Polls have shown that the vote is finely balanced as campaigning enters its final phase. 

Tory MP Sir Nicholas Soames hit out at those who claim his grandfather would have supported Brexit during an interview



Appealing for the public to consider the 'future of your children', Sir Nicholas said: 'You are going to take the most important decision that you have taken for a generation, of your lifetime.

'A decision that is going to affect your future, the future of your children and your grandchildren, the communities where you live.

'And above all else, the future of your country. I simply don't believeit is a sensible idea in a very difficult, still hostile world, for Britiain to cut herself off from that which has given her partly a great deal of stability, of coherence.

'It has magnified our influence and our power in the world.

'Being in the EU has a magnifying effect, it is not a diminishing effect.

'For us to say we do not want any more of this we are so successful, we are so powerful, we are so great at what we do that we don't need to be a member of that 500 million person organisation of 28 countries, we can go it alone.

'I think that is such a mistake and I beg you as you stand in that polling booth to cast that vote of historic proportion, that you will vote for Britain to remain a member of the EU.'

Sir Nicholas said leaving the EU now would be a 'terrible mistake'

Sir Nicholas said he feared that the nation 'could be on the verge of making a terrible mistake'.

And he invoked the memory of his grandfather Winston Churchill, who led Britain to victory in the Second World War. 

He said the founders of the EU had understood that there could 'never again be this terrible conflict between France and Germany involving Britain riding to the rescue'.

'I believe we would be betraying everything they set out to do'.

'People say to me well, Churchill would have wanted, he definitely would have wanted out.

'Everyone claims him for their own. 

'It is 51 years since his death and do we really, any of us, think seriously that Churchill would look out over the world today with all the instability still and its difficulties and its challenges,and say this is the right moment for Britain to cut itself free against all the advice of all our allies?

'I feel that he would think it wasn't, that the founders of Europe would think it was not.

'I think people would be amazed if we were to take the wrong decision.' 

 

