Revealed: The pro-Brexit Tory MP who sneered about 'stabbing David Cameron in the front'... and twisting the knife

2016-6-19

The pro-Brexit Tory MP who threatened to ‘stab David Cameron in the front’ in a political coup is exposed today.

Outspoken Leicestershire MP Andrew Bridgen said: ‘I don’t want to stab the Prime Minister in the back - I want to stab him in the front so I can see the expression on his face.

‘You’d have to twist the knife, though, because we want it back for [George] Osborne.’

Mr Bridgen (left), 51, stated publicly that Mr Cameron (right) was ‘finished’ and refused to rule out submitting a letter declaring no confidence in the Prime Minister

Mr Bridgen’s shocking comments were made three weeks ago amid rumours that rebel Tory MPs planned to topple Mr Cameron after the EU referendum, paving the way for a leadership contest.

Mr Bridgen, 51, stated publicly that Mr Cameron was ‘finished’ and refused to rule out submitting a letter declaring no confidence in the Prime Minister.

Reports in the media, though not in The Mail on Sunday, included a comment by an unnamed MP about ‘stabbing’ Mr Cameron. 

This newspaper can disclose that the MP who made the remark was Right-winger Mr Bridgen.

Mr Bridgen’s shocking comments were made three weeks ago amid rumours that rebel Tory MPs planned to topple Mr Cameron (pictured) after the EU referendum, paving the way for a leadership contest

Today’s disclosure comes after calls in the wake of the death of Labour MP Jo Cox for political leaders to desist from using extreme language in attacks on each other.

The referendum campaign has been marked by a spate of outbursts involving Tory MPs from the rival camps.

Leave leader Boris Johnson has denounced ‘demented’ Mr Cameron of talking ‘b*******’, while the Prime Minister has accused Mr Johnson of talking ‘nonsense on stilts’.

Asked to explain his comment last night, Mr Bridgen said: ‘Any attempt to link this to the horrific and tragic events of last week is distasteful in the extreme and beyond desperate.’

A senior Remain campaigner has received a death threat since the murder of Jo Cox.

The political figure, who asked not to be named, said the incident was reported to police and that a suspect had been released on bail.

The Mail on Sunday has been told that ten other campaigners in the Remain camp, including MPs, have been given ex-Special Forces bodyguards. They are each understood to have hired four-man protection teams due to a ‘threat to Remain supporters from Right-wingers’, according to a security source.

The bodyguards were recruited after responding to adverts for Close Protection Officers posted on a Facebook group used by ex-Special Forces troops. The adverts were for bodyguarding jobs for ‘political principals’ in London, Doncaster and Sheffield.

In 2015, the MoS revealed BBC boss Tony Hall was given guards after Jeremy Clarkson’s sacking.

