Gardener accused of murdering MP Jo Cox will face a trial in November, Old Bailey told

2016-6-23

The man accused of the 'terror-related' murder of Labour MP Jo Cox will go on trial in the autumn.

Thomas Mair, 52, is accused of shooting and stabbing Mrs Cox, 41, outside her constituency surgery in Birstall, near Leeds, a week ago today.

He is charged with murder, grievous bodily harm, possession of a firearm with intent to commit an indictable offence and possession of an offensive weapon.

Thomas Mair is accused of stabbing and shooting MP Jo Cox in an attack which shocked the world

Mair, left in court sketch, appeared via a videolink from Belmarsh prison, where he is currently being held

He appeared at the Old Bailey via video link from top security Belmarsh jail amid a list of terror-related cases to be heard by Mr Justice Saunders.

The senior judge set a provisional timetable with a trial fixed to start on November 14.

Another hearing will take place on September 19 at the Old Bailey, with a plea hearing pencilled in on October 4. The trial will be heard before a High Court judge and is likely to be at the Old Bailey.

Grey bearded Mair, from Birstall, whose case is being handled under the 'terrorism protocol', spoke only to confirm his name.

At a magistrates' hearing last week he gave it as 'Death to traitors, freedom for Britain.'

Throughout, he sat with his head bowed, taking notes, and made no reaction as his lawyer Cairns Nelson QC discussed his case with prosecutor Mark Dawson and the judge.

Mrs Cox's husband Brendan and their children Lejla, three, and Cuillin, five, went by boat to a ceremony in her honour in central London yesterday

The event was attended by Mrs Cox's sister, Kim (centre), and her parents Jean and Gordon Leadbeater

The preliminary hearing coincides with referendum day and comes the day after Mrs Cox's widower Brendan and their two young children marked what would have been her 42nd birthday.

Mr Cox, 37, and his children, Lejla, three, and her brother Cuillin, five, yesterday sat on a barge towing a floating floral memorial to the  MP ahead of a special service in Trafalgar Square 



Mr Cox’s voice broke with emotion as he thanked ‘Jo’s amazing friends, and friends of friends, and even complete strangers’ who had helped to organise the event.

He added: ‘As amazing and deeply touching as all of this is, I wish I wasn’t here today.' 

At a previous House of Commons event, the family heard Prime Minister David Cameron praise Mrs Cox as 'a voice of compassion whose irrepressible spirit and boundless energy lit up the lives of all who knew her'.

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn said that, with her death, British society had lost 'one of our very best'.

Floral tributes to Mrs Cox adorned Batley Town Hall polling station this morning ahead of the EU referendum

