Eagle-eyed viewer spots doors that look like HITLER in the background of referendum count

2016-6-24

An eagle-eyed viewer watching the BBC's EU referendum coverage has spotted a door at an election count that he says looks like Hitler.

Darren Haines took to Twitter with a screen grab of a reporter giving a piece to camera from a referendum count in Falkirk.

In the background people could be seen counting the ballot papers at the Grangemouth Sports Centre.

Eagle eyed Twitter user Darren Haines posted a picture on Twitter of the BBC coverage of the count in Falkirik where he said a set of double doors at Grangemouth Sports Centre looked like Hitler 



But in the right-hand corner of the screen, he pointed out that a set of double doors leading to and from the sports hall looked exactly like the Nazi leader.

Captioning the picture he wrote: 'There is a door in Falkirk that looks like Hitler #bbcreferendum.'

And after posting the tweet, others were quick to point out the likeness of the door to the fuhrer.

Twitter users were quick to point out that the door at the Grangemouth Sports Centre, right, looked like Hitler, left

Magic Martial wrote: 'Does anyone else think that this door looks like Hitler? LOL'

While Nancy Von Short posted: '#HitlerDoor is winning the best #EUref moments so far.'

And Paul Tonner joked: 'Interestingly enough , there's a door in Hitler that looks like Falkirk.'

After posting the tweet, others were quick to point out the likeness of the door to the Nazi leader with one reporter snapping a selfie next to it 

Kenny Stewart also took a screen grab of the 'Hitler door' joking it was now being guarded by a policeman 

Meanwhile other reporters covering the count in Falkirk were quick to snap selfies next to the door.

Andrew Learmouth, a freelance journalist, wrote: 'Found the #hitlerdoor ', next to a picture of himself next to it.

The count at Grangemouth Sports Centre tallied the votes in the EU referendum for the Falkirk Council area in central Scotland.

 

