Which way is the Brexit? Boris Johnson urges voters 'change the course of history' ton Thursday as he visits truck business

2016-6-20

Boris Johnson today warned voters have one chance to 'change the whole course of European history' by backing Brexit on Thursday.

As the long-awaited referendum moves into its final hours and with the polls finely balanced, the Vote Leave champion said voters had a 'fundamental decision' to make.

Mr Johnson, who was back on the stump at Ipswich firm Trucks R Us today, said the Remain campaign was offering 'nothing... but the steady and miserable erosion of Parliamentary democracy' in Britain.

This way for Brexit: Boris Johnson warned voters have one chance to 'change the whole course of European history' by backing Brexit on Thursday

The former London Mayor took control on the campaign trail today ahead of Thursday's vote

David Cameron last night made his final pitch to voters in a live BBC Question Time special, insisting a strong economy underpinned everything else - but he was lashed again and again over immigration.

Referendum campaigning will again be muted today as MPs gather in Westminster to pay tribute to Jo Cox at an emergency recall of the House of Commons in the wake of her killing.

A final push will begin tomorrow night when Boris Johnson takes part in the biggest live TV debate of the campaign at Wembley Arena.

In his final newspaper column before the vote, the ex-Mayor of London wrote in the Daily Telegraph: 'When you pick up your ballot paper this Thursday, you have it in your hands to transform Britain's current democratic arrangements for the better.

'You can change the whole course of European history – and if you vote Leave, I believe that change will be overwhelmingly positive. 



'If we vote Remain, we stay locked in the back of the car, driven by someone with an imperfect command of English, and going a direction we don't want to go.'

As the referendum heads into its final hours, polls are mixed. Results out over the weekend revealed a tie, Remain leads of up to 3 per cent and Leave leads of 2% 

Boris Johnson returned to the campaign trail at Ipswich firm Trucks R Us today as he urged voters to seize their chance to 'change the course of European history' by endorsing Brexit on Thursday 

Mr Johnson said a Remain vote would do nothing to 'rebuke the elites in Brussels' or allow Britain to set up a trade deal with America, China or India. 

And in a clear dismissal of Mr Cameron - who just last night insisted Britain was better in the room, at the negotiating table, Mr Johnson said: 'We are not more powerful, or more influential for being around the table in Brussels.

'Look at the pitiful results of the so-called renegotiation earlier this year. We are drowned out.

Nobel laureates from around the world have urged voters to back staying in the EU in Thursday's referendum, warning of long-lasting economic damage after a vote to leave. 

With just three days to go until voters finally go to the polls to decide the future of Britain's EU membership, 10 Nobel-prize laureates in the world of economics claimed Brexit would 'create major uncertainty about Britain's alternative future trading arrangements'. 

The leading professors said the UK's trading relationships with the rest of Europe, north American and China would be put in jeopardy if Britain leaves the EU. 

Writing in a letter to the Guardian today, they write: 'These effects, though one-off, would persist for many years. 

'Thus the economic arguments are clearly in favour of remaining in the EU,' the 10 Nobel-prize winners conclude. 

However economics laureate Christopher Pissarides said today that the outcome of Thursday's historic referendum could come down to the failure of the Remain campaign to explain what's at stake for Britain and the wider world. 

He said the impact of a Brexit vote would have much far-reaching consequences than people had so far warned. 

'The impact from a Brexit will be worse than most people think and it's partly the failure of the campaign to remain to point it out,' Pissarides warned. 

'When you have a process that started 60 years ago and then suddenly you reverse - it will not be a temporary glitch, it is going to be a massive bump,' he added. 





'And it is an illusion to think that if we vote to Remain, we are somehow opting for the status quo. 

'The status quo is not on offer. If we stay in, we will be engaged willy-nilly in the desperate attempt to keep the euro together, by building an economic government of Europe.'

Mr Johnson said he wanted to hand 'power back to the people' because democracy was the 'best way of correcting the errors of our people'.

He said: 'Now is the time to believe in ourselves, and in what Britain can do, and to remember that we always do best when we believe in ourselves.

'Of course we can continue to provide leadership and support for Europe – but inter-governmentally, outside the supranational EU system.

'I hope you will vote Leave, and take back control of this great country's destiny; and if we Vote Leave, then all our votes will count for more in the future.

'This chance will not come again in our lifetimes, and I pray we do not miss it.'

Mr Johnson will again be joined by Labour's Gisela Stuart and Tory Andrea Leadsom when he takes to the Wembley Arena stage tomorrow night.

For the Remain side, Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson, Mayor of London Sadiq Khan and TUC chief Frances O'Grady.

In his final live TV event last night, Mr Cameron recalled Winston Churchill as he pleaded with voters to back him on Thursday. 

He said: 'In my office I sit two yards away from the Cabinet Room where Winston Churchill decided in May 1940 to fight on against Hitler - the best and greatest decision perhaps anyone's ever made in our country, right?

'He didn't want to be alone, he wanted to be fighting with the French and with the Poles and the others, but he didn't quit.

'He didn't quit in Europe, he didn't quit on European democracy, he didn't quit on European freedom.

'We want to fight for these things today and you can't win, you can't fight if you're not in the room. You can't win a football match if you're not on the pitch.'

The Prime Minister's spirited defence of the EU came after one audience member said he was a '21st century Neville Chaberlain' for hailing the deal he negotiated with the leaders of the other 27 member states.

Boris Johnson, pictured greeting workers at the truck firm today, urged voters to seize their one and only chance to quit the EU at the referendum on Thursday

David Cameron, pictured at the Mini factory today, recalled Winston Churchill as he pleaded with voters to back his Remain campaign on Thursday







David Cameron has been told by allies not to hand Boris Johnson a Cabinet job if Britain votes to stay in the EU on Thursday, it emerged today. 

Pro-EU ministers and MPs want him to scrap plans for a 'unity reshuffle,' insisting Brexit ministers and MPs had been disloyal by campaigning so vociferously the Prime Minister.

Employment minister Priti Patel has been one of the most aggressive Out campaigners who have attacked government policy despite being a Cabinet minister herself, but Justice Secretary Michael Gove - a close friend of Mr Cameron - has not held back from criticising the Government's record.  

Mr Johnson, pictured at Vote Leave's final weekend rally yesterday, said voters had the power to 'transform Britain's current democratic arrangements for the better' at Thursday's referendum 

Mr Johnson was tipped to be given a top job in government as a gesture to the Leave camp of the Tory party and an attempt to put the bitter infighting within the party to bed.

A minister campaigning for a Remain vote on Thursday told the Daily Telegraph: 'People who backed the Prime Minister and made the case for the EU would be outraged to see people who attacked the Government getting promoted.'

But failure to promote pro-Brexit Tory MPs risks causing a long-lasting rift in the party over Europe. 

Mr Gove is expected to keep his role in Cabinet, but other pro-Brexit Cabinet ministers are expected to be demoted in favour of younger, more loyal MPs. 



Chris Grayling, Leader of the House of Commons, Culture Secretary John Whittingdale and Northern Ireland Secretary Theresa Villiers could lose their jobs along with Ms Patel. 

Vote Leave campaigner Liam Fox, the former defence secretary, could return to Cabinet if Mr Cameron decides in favour of a unity reshuffle. 

However some within the party believe Mr Cameron will wait until the autumn to reshuffle his top team in order to calm tensions in the party after months of blue-on-blue civil war, which has dominated newspaper headlines and some fear done permanent damage the party's image. 

Employment minister Priti Patel (pictured) has been one of the most aggressive Out campaigners who have attacked government policy despite being a Cabinet minister herself, but Justice Secretary Michael Gove - a close friend of Mr Cameron - has not held back from criticising the Government's record

Tory peer Baroness Warsi claimed to have switched to the Remain camp

Maverick Tory peer Baroness Warsi last night claimed to have switched to the Remain camp in protest over a controversial Nigel Farage immigration poster.

However, her high-profile 'defection' was greeted with bafflement among Leave supporters - who could not remember her ever campaigning in their side.

Lady Warsi's claims were made following a day when a Ukip poster claiming migration was pushing the continent to 'breaking point' were condemned by all sides.

Last night she told The Times: 'That breaking point poster really was - for me - the breaking point to say: 'I can't go on supporting this'.

She added: 'We all feel very passionately about these issues, it's when you start to believe that any means are acceptable to achieve an end. It's not an easy decision.

'When I look at the people who are now saying the things they are saying and the people who are supporting that approach, the BNP, Donald Trump, Marine le Pen, Austria's Freedom Party — every day it feels like the far right is coming out to stand by Leave.' 

She later told the BBC: 'This kind of nudge-nudge, wink-wink xenophobic racist campaign may be politically savvy or politically useful in the short term, but it causes long-term damage to communities.

'The vision that me and other Brexiters who have been involved right from the outset, who had a positive outward-looking vision of what a Brexit vote might mean, unfortunately those voices have now been stifled.

'What we see is the divisive campaign which has resulted in people like me and others who are deeply Eurosceptic and want to see a reformed relationship feel that they now have to leave Leave.'

But a spokesman for Vote Leave said the campaign was confused by Lady Warsi's announcement.

He said: 'We don't remember Warsi ever joining our campaign so we are puzzled by her claims to have defected.'

Daniel Hannan, the high profile Tory MEP and Leave campaigner, said: 'When I invited Sayeeda Warsi to join the Leave campaign, she declined. Fair enough, obviously. But how is this a 'defection'?'



Tory MP Bernard Jenkin added: 'I helped set up Vote Leave and she has not been at a single meeting I have attended. ''Defects'' just not accurate!.' 

 

