Stop using our logos to get Brexit! Vote Leave campaign faces legal action from angry firms including Airbus and Unilever

2016-6-16

Vote Leave published the logos of Airbus, Unilver, GE, Nissan, Toyota and Vauxhall on a leaflet pointing out previous statements from the firms saying they will stay in the UK whatever the result of the EU vote

The official Brexit campaign could face legal action for using the logos of top firms in a 'propoganda' leaflet sent to voters.  

Vote Leave published the logos of Airbus, Unilver, GE, Nissan, Toyota and Vauxhall on a leaflet pointing out previous statements from the firms saying they will stay in the UK whatever the result of the referendum. 

But in a furious letter to Vote Leave the heads of three of the employers accused the group of 'deliberately' trying to 'mislead' voters by using their branding on campaign literature.

They claimed their logos were being used for 'propoganda purposes' and had implied to voters that they supported Britain leaving the EU.  

In a strongly worded letter, seen by The Independent, the chief executives of Unilever, GE and Airbus said Vote Leave's use of their logos is 'highly misleading to British voters' and an 'act of bad faith towards our companies'.

And setting out an ultimatum, the firms warn  they will press ahead with legal action if they continue to distribute the leaflets.

In a leaflet titled 'EU Myth busters,'  Vote Leave stated: 'EU regulations make it harder for British firms to hire staff. 

'Major employers like Toyota, Nissan and Vauhxall, Unilever, GE and Airbus have all said they'll stay in the UK whatever the result of the referendum.' 

The campaign to keep Britain in the EU said the letter was proof that Vote Leave are trying to 'lie' to voters about the referendum.  



Amber Rudd, a leading member of the Remain campaign, said: 'This is disgraceful behaviour by the leave campaign.

'To misrepresent major companies for propaganda purposes as part of their official election address is nothing short of using taxpayers' money to lie to the British people.

In a furious letter to Vote Leave, which is led by Boris Johnson (pictured campaigning with fishmongers in East Anglia this morning) the heads of Unilever, Airbus and GE accused the group of 'deliberately' trying to 'mislead' voters by using their branding on campaign literature

Campaigners for Britain to stay in the EU said the letter was proof that Vote Leave are telling 'lies' to voters about the referendum, including Ros Altman, the pro-EU pensions minister

The latest row came as another poll showed Brexit six points ahead with just one week to go until the June 23 referendum

'Vote Leave have resorted to lying about British businesses because they know they cannot get their support honestly.

British employers – like every credible economist and institution – know that staying in the European Union is better for our economy, our businesses, our families, our jobs and the money in our pockets.'

The latest row came as another poll showed Brexit ahead with just one week to go until the June 23 referendum.  

Today's survey by Ipsos Mori put the Leave campaign six points ahead of the Remain camp and matched a string of polls over the past week to have shown big leads for Leave.

The details of today's opinion poll made grim reading for the Remain campaign.

Fewer than one in five people believe the main Treasury campaign claim that households would be £4,300 after a Brexit vote.

By contrast, almost half of people do believe the controversial Leave campaign figure that Britain would get back control of £350million a week after Brexit.



Boris Johnson today denied he was bidding to become Prime Minister in the aftermath of the referendum as another poll showed Vote Leave was six points clear.

With just one week until the historic referendum finally takes place, the latest survey matched a string of polls over the past week to have shown big leads for Leave.

Despite the Remain campaign scrambling to halt an apparent slide in support, the new snapshot of public opinion by Ipsos-Mori indicated the momentum continued to be with Brexit supporters.

On a visit to a fish firm in Lowestoft, Suffolk, the ex-mayor of London gutted a fish for the cameras before dismissing suggestions he could be in No 10 within weeks.

Boris Johnson went in search of inspiration today as he was told he should be prime minister on a campaign visit to a fish firm in Suffolk today 

David Cameron - due to campaign in Gibraltar today - is widely expected to announce his resignation if today's poll for the Evening Standard is borne out at the ballot box

On his visit, Mr Johnson declared 'they're pinching our fish' as he posed for photos while holding a live lobster, before then attempting to fillet a salmon.

Speaking at the Sam Cole Food Group to people involved in the fishing industry, Mr Johnson said he is campaigning for Britain to 'take back control' of its waters and ensure North Sea fish is more fairly distributed.

The former London mayor said: 'We think we'd get more boats coming to Lowestoft.'

He added: 'We hope that carries your core support.'

John Knights, who has a fishing boat in Lowestoft docks, said: 'As long as you end up prime minister.'

But Mr Johnson replied: 'No, that's not going to happen.'

Speaking after Mr Johnson's visit, Mr Knights added: 'I'm really worried about this country.'

Asked if he hopes Mr Johnson would be PM if the UK leaves the EU, Mr Knights replied: 'Yeah I do. That man in charge - he's got a pair of balls.

'I don't think he knows much about the (fishing) job, but I believe he really does care about Britain and I believe the man has got some guts to run this country - not just the fishing.

'This country is getting in a mess.'

Mr Johnson grappled with a live lobster on his visit to the fish factory to make a rallying cry to protect the fishing industry by voting for Brexit next week

Mr Johnson, who was joined by Conservative ministers Penny Mordaunt and George Eustice, was also presented with a 'Save Our Soles' T-shirt.

He joked: 'You've got to make sure you don't say that too fast.'

The T-shirt also says: 'EU destroyed our fishing industry - vote leave.'

The details of today's opinion poll made grim reading for the Remain campaign.

Fewer than one in five people believe the main Treasury campaign claim that households would be £4,300 after a Brexit vote.

By contrast, almost half of people do believe the controversial Leave campaign figure that Britain would get back control of £350million a week after Brexit.

Both numbers have been dismissed by independent experts but the gulf in trust between the two campaigns will send new shudders through the Remain camp. 



In other findings, Ipsos-Mori found more people think they would be better off in five years after Brexit than if Britain stays in.

Immigration is now the most important issue to voters seven days out - a sharp turn around from earlier in the campaign when the economy dominated. 

 

