Irish government hits the panic button as Brexit poll surge fuels fears over investment and border controls

2016-6-16

The Irish government is preparing a major drive to reassure investors in the wake of the surge for Brexit in the polls.

Dublin is said to be readying contingency plans for a campaign stressing that it will not be quitting the EU even if UK voters decide to leave.

Taoiseach Enda Kenny has criticised the Remain campaign in Northern Ireland and reiterated that there will be no referendum in the Republic.

David Cameron and Irish Taoiseach Enda Kenny. The government in the Republic is said to be preparing contingency plans for a Brexit vote after support surged in polls 

David Cameron angered unionists yesterday by warning that border controls could have to be introduced between mainland Britain and Northern Ireland after Brexit.

'If we were to leave – the leave campaigners want to make a big issue about our borders – we will have a land border between Britain outside the European Union and the Republic of Ireland inside the European Union,' Mr Cameron told the House of Commons.

'Therefore, you can only have new border controls between the Republic and Northern Ireland or, which I would regret hugely, you would have to have some sort of checks on people as they left Belfast or other parts of Northern Ireland to come to the rest of the UK.'

According to the Irish Times, Mr Kenny told his Fine Gael parliamentary party last night that there would be serious implications for Ireland after Brexit. 

There have been concerns that growth will be slashed and investors may move elsewhere in the expectation that Ireland will follow the UK out.

However, there have also been predictions that more businesses will relocate to the Republic to maintain links with the EU.

Mr Kenny is spending two days in Manchester and Liverpool urging Irish people living in Britain to vote Remain on June 23. 

'There is evidence of little activity from the political parties on the ground in explaining to people what this referendum is about and the consequences for Northern Ireland,' he said.

Mr Kenny had been expected to make a joint appearance with Mr Cameron, but it has apparently been cancelled as the PM lowers his profile over fears he is turning off voters.

A government source told the newspaper the Irish government was readying a 'huge' worldwide campaign in the 'commercial, diplomatic and political' spheres to stress that Ireland would continue being in the EU. China and the US are thought to be key areas on which they will focus.



 



 

