It's no time to bring the curtain down on the EU: ANDREW LLOYD WEBBER warns that Brexit could be catastrophic for Britain 

2016-6-19

Andrew Lloyd Webber: 'I have made my mind up. Despite sharing a mountain of misgivings with the Brexiteers, I believe it is vital that we remain'

Only six months ago I was reminded of the frustrations of Britain being a member of the EU. My show, Love Never Dies, the sequel to Phantom, opened at the Stage Operettenhaus in Hamburg, the culmination of months of hard work.

Alas, the first night was marred by an unfortunate breakdown, the direct result of EU working time directives. A separate production of Phantom in Germany will soon close for similar reasons – 36 days paid holiday and up to 42 days paid sick leave is too much for the show to carry!

In my maiden Lords speech nearly 20 years ago, I pointed out that tickets to my shows in some EU countries cost twice as much as they did in London’s West End. The gap has come down, though only because Brussels regulations have forced us to raise our ticket prices closer to theirs.

There are so many examples of cirrhotic EU bureaucrats’ meddling that make theatre producers apoplectic, you could almost write a play about it – though it would have to be a farce. It is the same in every industry, making even the most staunch pro-European teeter towards Brexit.

I should say here and now that, in my view, the June 23 referendum should not be taking place.

David Cameron should have sought a postponement last autumn when it was clear Vladimir Putin, through his military action in Syria, was deliberately fuelling the migrant crisis. Putin knew it would strain Europe to breaking point and stir up old enmities along the way. He eyes Brexit with glee, knowing that if we quit Europe, there is a good chance it will hasten his dream of the break-up of the EU.

I am sure I speak for millions when I say I have found it very difficult to make up my mind. The quality of debate has not helped.

I am not alone in deploring the extremist rhetoric deployed by both sides. For Leave, Boris Johnson invokes the name of Hitler. For Remain, Cameron warns of a recession if we don’t stay in.

Lord Saatchi recently summed up the dilemma we voters face when he said: ‘To remain is too frustrating. To leave is too dangerous.’

So should we remain or leave?

I have made my mind up. Despite sharing a mountain of misgivings with the Brexiteers, I believe it is vital that we remain.

On June 23, we need to think back further than last year’s migrant crisis. My generation have been the lucky ones. Our parents and grandparents tended to view Europe through their generation’s experiences of Ypres or the Normandy beaches on D-Day. My generation tends to see it as a holiday destination, a trading partner, somewhere to work or live.

Only six months ago I was reminded of the frustrations of Britain being an EU member. The opening night of my show, Love Never Dies, in Germany was marred by  breakdown due to EU working time directives

But there are new dangers with chilling echoes of the Europe our parents and grandparents knew.

Austria has recently missed electing an extreme Right-wing president. Marine Le Pen could become president of France next year. The far-Right has made advances in Norway and Finland. Nationalists run Poland, Hungary and Slovakia.

Happily, today Germany and Britain are not at each other’s throats. But the Putin-fuelled refugee crisis has undermined Angela Merkel, once the most powerful and stable politician in Europe, and the German far-Right is back in business.

Never has it been more important for the moderating voice of Britain to be heard loud and clear at the heart of Europe.

Within Europe we can influence. Outside we cannot.

I have made my mind up. Despite sharing a mountain of misgivings with the Brexiteers, I believe it is vital that we remain

According to some polling experts there are a large number of people known as ‘shy Remainers’, who do not shout their views from the rooftops. They are like the ‘shy Tories’ who won the Election for David Cameron despite the political cognoscenti suggesting otherwise.

I am happy to out myself today as a not-so-shy Remainer. Yes, to remain in the EU will mean more frustrations, but I honestly believe that to leave at such a parlous time could be catastrophic.

IT is impossible to ignore a moderate like the former Polish Prime Minister Donald Tusk when he says: ‘As a historian, I fear that Brexit could be the beginning of the destruction of not only the EU but also of Western political civilisation in its entirety.’

OK, he’s president of the European Council, but such an extreme statement from an eminently reasonable man has to be considered seriously. Perhaps it is not as astonishing as it seems.

So on June 23 I’m going to cling on to my battered European dream. To remain in the EU will probably mean a few more EU directive-induced glitches in my shows. But it is a small price to pay. This is no time to bring down the curtain on Britain’s leading role in Europe.

