Vice President Joe Biden admit's 'We would have preferred a different outcome' as stunned leaders around the world react to Britain's historic vote

2016-6-24

Britain's historic vote to leave Europe prompted leaders around the world to warn against 'hysterical' reactions and provide reassurances that the world order would go on despite the country's stunning decision. 

'We would have preferred a different outcome,' Vice President Joe Biden said Friday morning while appearing at Trinity College in Ireland, where he was accepting an honorary degree during his overseas trip.

But Biden said he and President Obama' fully respect' the UK's decision to leave the EU.

He said the 'special bond' that has defined the two nation's relationship for generations 'will endure' regardless of the vote.





Vice President Joe Biden, traveling in Ireland, said the special relationship between the U.S. and Britain would 'endure'

House Speaker Paul Ryan echoed similar sentiments in a brief statement put out by his office

Keep calm and carry on: German chancellor Angela Merkel called for people to remain 'calm and composed'

'I respect the decision made by the people of the United Kingdom. The UK is an indispensable ally of the United States, and that special relationship is unaffected by this vote,' Ryan said.

'Let the British people manage their own affairs,' said Arkansas GOP senator Tom Cotton, who has been mentioned as a possible Trump vice presidential pick, speaking on the Senate floor.

Cotton celebrated the vote in a statement.

'The British people exercised their sovereign right of self-government, decisively choosing to leave the European Union. We respect their decision and celebrate their democracy,' he said.

'We should now begin negotiations on a free-trade agreement with the United Kingdom,' Cotton advised.'Meanwhile, the result of this referendum should remind leaders in Washington, London, Brussels, and across Europe that our citizens are dissatisfied with stagnant economies, declining wages, uncontrolled migration, rising crime, and terror attacks at home. It's time to abandon the failed policies of the past and solve the real problems of the present.' 

Trump at his Scottish golf course defends having his campaign pay hundreds of thousands to rent his own properties because other people's are 'not as good' 

British Prime minister David Cameron, who led the fight to remain part of Europe, immediately announced his decision to step down in October. 

'I think the country requires fresh leadership,' Cameron said. 'It would not be right for me to be the captain that steers our country to next destination.'

German chancellor Angela Merkel, who as leader of the economic powerhouse at the heart of the E.U., said Germany would maintain 'close future relations' with Britain.



She urged Europe to remain 'calm and composed' despite the tumultuous path ahead. 

GOP presidential candidate Donald Trump cheered the decision during an appearance to promote his refurbished Trump Turnberry golf course in Scotland. He called the separation a 'fantastic thing.'

Trump had unequivocally expressed his support for Britain's exit before the vote – and while he declined to take credit for the outcome, he said the vote may have been President Obama's fault. Obama made a pitch for Britain to stay part of Europe.

'Your people have taken the country back and there's something very very nice about that,' Trump said. 

Trump said President Obama 'he got it totally wrong. And he's embarrassed.'

 

European Council president Donald Tusk warned, 'this is not a moment for hysterical reactions.'



'We have to remain calm and composed. We need to make composed analysis and decisions,' she said, even as she referenced 'living in a world of turmoil.' 



Merkel, who led efforts to absorb Syrian immigrants and then had to back off earlier offers under pressure, said, 'We need to make sure that firstly Europe is varied, and as varied as the people of the EU are.'

European Council president Donald Tusk warned, 'this is not a moment for hysterical reactions.'

Former British Prime Minister Tony Blair, appearing on Fox News while Donald Trump was unveiling his refurbished Turnberry golf course in Scotland, warned that the vote had 'huge implications.'

'We've got to accept the result,' said Blair, who was on the losing side. He warned that the process of separation would be 'very difficult.'  



German foreign minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier called the results 'truly sobering' and called it a 'sad day for Europe and for Britain.

 





