Pre-referendum nerves: Bookies v The Doorstep

2016-06-22

With just a day to go before voting, the result of the British referendum on EU membership is anybody’s guess. The most recent FT poll-of-polls has Leave ahead by 45-44 – and there will be further polls released later today. Those hopeful Remainers who thought they had spotted a potentially decisive surge to their side late last week have been disappointed, as some recent polls have seen a swing back to Leave.

Both sides have an extra factor from which they take comfort. The Remain side point to the fact that the bookmakers still predict that Britain will vote to Remain inside the EU – Ladbrokes, my local turf accountants, are offering odds of 3-1 against Brexit. But the pro-Leave camp have a different source of encouragement. They are boosted by the extremely strong pro-Leave sentiment that many MPs are encountering on the doorsteps, as they campaign. One pro-Leave campaigner says that if that sentiment is genuinely reflected at the ballot box, he would not be surprised if his side wins by as much as 57-43.

However, both the bookies and the doorstep have their limitations as a guide.

Many in the financial markets seem to believe that the bookmakers represent the “wisdom of crowds” – but that wisdom is not infallible. The bookies also thought that Leicester City were 5,000-1 against to win the Premier league. More pertinently, perhaps, they got the result of the last General Election wrong. I know because I made a winning bet on an overall Tory majority at 8-1.

However sentiment encountered on the streets is also not a reliable guide. If it was, Scottish independence would have been won by a landslide in the 2014 referendum. Back then, the pro-independence campaign was much more voluble and visible – as is the case now with the pro-Leave campaign. But the day was won in Scotland by the “shy Unionists” who had kept their heads down in the campaign, but voted to stay inside the UK. The question is whether a similar phenomenon will emerge in the Brexit referendum.

The social and political divisions within Britain, revealed by this campaign, will last well beyond the referendum. Whatever the result, one side is likely to be left feeling bitterly disappointed, angry and even betrayed. The Leave campaign is already preparing a narrative in which they were cruising to victory – only for that victory to be snatched away, after the brutal murder of Jo Cox MP. That could prepare the ground for them to demand a second referendum. Many on the Remain campaign still cannot quite believe that they might actually lose. They will be disbelieving and despairing if the result goes the wrong way on Friday morning

