50 ways to hedge your Brexit: ‘keep it simple, stupid’

2016-06-16

We’ve asked some investors what they’re lining up for the day after the UK’s EU referendum, particularly if Brits vote to leave. Here’s a taster:

Stephen Mitchell, fund management director at Jupiter Asset Management:

Very simply… We have refrained from adding to our UK weight for a year. If we get a dislocation in markets it’s often the only time to buy high quality names at a discount, which is what we would look to do on Brexit, especially if sterling falls. Little to do on remain.

Paul McNamara, investment director in EM debt at GAM:

Keep it simple, stupid. Short sterling vs either dollars or havens (Swiss franc, yen). Buy gilts and/or bunds. We walk in on the 24th and certainly Carney and possibly Draghi open the liquidity floodgates.

In EM, short the Mexican peso, South African rand (generic risk-off trades).

(Bitterly…) Long Dublin property, Frankfurt headhunters etc etc long anything belonging to the chancers who financed this fiasco.

Luke Hickmore, Aberdeen Asset Management:

Don’t take large bets with gilt yields – remove overall risk here (i.e. neutral to benchmark or short overall) in an average sense as well as the shape of the gilt yield curve.

Make sure you have plenty of liquidity – there will be a lot of opportunities to pick up great long term holdings as the volatility increases in the next week. Preference for UK banks over European for example – the former have little or no long term default risks whereas the Italians in particular will come under pressure.

Short sterling basket still seems a sensible idea.

Buy US Treasuries – is this the only safe haven left? Flight to quality either way – If we leave people will worry about Europe let alone the UK, and the Swiss curve is very negative.

Equity-like risks in the credit market such as AT1’s and corporate hybrids – sell. Again will most likely be better opportunities to get back in. Worth noting that credit markets have been getting a lot more equity like risks in the last year or so— AT1’s Coco’s, Corporate Hybrid growth…

Mr Hickmore’s colleague James Athey says:

The two inherent uncertainties in this event are the result itself, obviously, and the direction and magnitude of market moves in either outcome. The combination of these uncertainties has led me to the conclusion that there are no attractive and entirely asymmetric positions I can take.

Therefore my strategy has been driven by caution – to be flat sterling and sterling assets and running low levels of overall and outright risk. I believe the most attractive and asymmetric position is one I held anyway for policy divergence reasons – to be short euros against dollars.

In a Brexit outcome I think the focus will quickly shift to the problems this would create for the Eurozone and further stimulus and even an existential crisis will likely result in a weaker euro. Conversely in a Bremain scenario the primary focus may well be a relief risk-rally allowing the Fed to become more hawkish pushing the dollar stronger across the board.

Nick Gartside at JPMorgan Asset Management:

The increased probability in recent polls of a Brexit vote is not being priced into most bond markets. For example, a strong rebound in credit spreads over the past three months across a sample of investment grade issuers with similar maturity bonds in both the sterling and euro markets suggests that Brexit premiums have now been priced out of the market. We have seen similar mispricing in government securities.

Fixed income investors should look to Brexit-proof their portfolios now. Here are a few ideas to consider: Lighten Sterling exposures, as a UK exit from the EU would likely see sterling depreciate, with the Bank of England expected to act quickly to expand monetary policy.

Reduce peripheral and central European government bonds that could be at risk of a sell-off, while favouring large economies with independent monetary policies (such as the US).

Trim credit exposures in both sterling and euro issuers that lack sufficient Brexit premiums.

Duration will be a bond investor’s friend in a Brexit scenario. In JPM Global Bond Opportunities Fund we’ve taken duration to a record high of 5 years in our portfolio, a reflection of our conviction that global yields will stay low.

We’ll have more of these for you later. If you’d like to contribute, you can email katie.martin@ft.com.

