Twilio: public life

2016-06-23

The hopes of Silicon Valley’s financial backers rested on the haunches of a very small and unassuming unicorn. Twilio, a software company that connects apps to text messages, broke the drought of venture-backed tech flotations on Thursday, launching its initial public offering above the previously indicated range. So cocky was banker Goldman Sachs that it sold the stock in the teeth of the Brexit vote. Bring on Uber and Airbnb?

It is a bit much to treat Twilio — whose code, for example, allows Uber drivers to communicate with customers — as a proxy for the vast private tech sector. Its revenues were $167m last year. It barely qualified as a “unicorn” at all, having only just crossed the barrier of a $1bn private valuation. 

But it is at least providing a public market validation for a private pricetag. In its last private fundraising in April 2015, Twilio raised money at $11.31 a share. It sold shares in the public market at $15 on Thursday and trading opened at $24.

Other companies have not been so fortunate. Square, for example, was forced to price its IPO below its last private round. The unenthusiastic reception to most tech IPOs has added to the sense that the private funding market is in a bubble.

Twilio is not profitable but it does show fast revenue growth — more than 80 per cent last year. If it maintains its current pace it will have more than $300m in revenue this year and a relatively modest forward valuation of 4 times sales at the offer price. It is no surprise that it traded higher.

The successful sale may not prove much. Twitter popped more than 70 per cent on its first day and now trades 40 per cent below the offer price. Most prominent tech IPOs have fared horribly. 

It could be that Twilio has made an astute bet that the venture capital environment is about to get much chillier. But for now, an IPO does not look like graduating to the big time. It is less a badge of honour than a consolation prize. 

Email the Lex team at lex@ft.com

