David Cameron puts trust in ‘Remain dividend’ after EU referendum

2016-06-21

David Cameron has predicted a “Remain dividend”, with an investment surge into Britain, if the country votes on Thursday to stay in the EU. But he admitted: “It’s very close; nobody knows what’s going to happen.”

The bosses of 1,200 companies have signed a letter warning that a Brexit vote would “put jobs at risk”, but Mr Cameron told the Financial Times he was “frustrated” that more had not spoken out in recent weeks.

Speaking ahead of a vote that could determine his own political future as well as Britain’s place in the world, Mr Cameron said voters could expect to see immediate economic benefits if they voted Remain.

“I think on Friday that businesses, wealth creators, job creators will think: Britain has made a decision, let’s pile back into the economy and create jobs and opportunity because it’s a great place to do business,” he said.

Bookmakers continue to believe a Remain vote is more likely, and sterling on Tuesday briefly touched a new high for the year, a signal financial markets are also betting on Britons voting to stay in the EU. But the Financial Times’ poll of polls gives Leave a 45-44 lead, with turnout likely to be a key determinant of the result.

Mr Cameron yesterday urged older voters to “think about the hopes and dreams of your children and grandchildren”, in an attempt to inject an emotional element into Thursday’s poll. Opinion surveys have consistently shown older voters siding with Leave while the young support EU membership. 

The prime minister said there was no turning back from a Brexit vote. “If we vote to leave, this really is irreversible,” he said, adding that future generations would have to live with the result.

The Remain camp is mobilising a vast ground operation to “get out the vote”, hoping that the combined efforts of nearly all mainstream UK political parties — Conservative, Labour, Liberal Democrat, SNP and Greens — and other activists can push up the turnout.

In spite of the uncertainty of the result, Mr Cameron insisted he was right to hold the referendum early in this parliament because there was “always going to be a Brexit chill” over the economy until the issue was settled.

In a warning to Tory MPs who say they would continue to fight for a Brexit if Remain won only a narrow majority, the prime minister said: “As far as I’m concerned this referendum should settle the matter.”

He said he would “rapidly” begin exit negotiations with the EU in the event of a Leave vote by activating Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty, which formally begins two-year divorce proceedings, although his pro-Brexit cabinet colleague Michael Gove wants to move more slowly.

Mr Cameron still believes he can win and will be boosted by a letter to The Times signed by 1,200 business leaders saying Brexit would “lead to economic uncertainty and would put jobs at risk”. Those businesses, including 51 FTSE 100 companies and 910 small and medium enterprises, employ 1.75m people.

But the prime minister said he was disappointed that more companies had not come forward. “It can sometimes be frustrating that organisations feel constrained and say they can’t take sides or put their heads over the parapet.”

But he praised “some real heroes and heroines” in the business world for taking a stand, singling out Carolyn McCall, chief executive of EasyJet, for special mention.

Boris Johnson, former London mayor, was the star name for the Leave camp on Tuesday night in the final televised EU debate before the vote: a BBC event staged at Wembley Arena with an audience of more than 6,000.

————————-

UK’s EU referendum: full coverage and analysis

View the FT’s comprehensive guide to the vote on whether Britain should stay in Europe, with all the latest news, analysis and commentary from both sides of the debate. See more 

————————-

