EU referendum: a contest between economics and emotion

2016-06-23

In the waning days of Britain’s EU referendum campaign, a 68-year-old Leave activist — hard of hearing from decades of work in the Welsh coal mines — leaned toward a reporter and gripped his arm tight.

“I’m willing to fight!” said Mel Eason, as fellow members of the UK Independence party gathered in a Welsh pub vowed to take back their country in Thursday’s EU referendum after decades of subservience to Brussels.

The next day, a young campaigner with pink-dyed hair, who had come from London to lobby a group of Welsh small businesses, practically shrugged when making her case for the UK to remain in the EU. The numbers, she said, spoke for themselves.

Those exchanges captured a fundamental contrast between the campaigns for the referendum: a Remain camp that, with its relentless focus on the costs of exit, has often struggled to match the fervour of the Leave side, which has fired up legions of disaffected, often working-class voters.

John Major, the former UK prime minister and Remain campaigner, said it had been “a battle between economics and emotion”.

It was only the killing last week of Jo Cox, a Labour MP and passionate advocate of Britain’s EU membership, that gave the Remain camp an emotional dimension.

In the stands of a cricket match on a recent London evening, a screenwriter and a lawyer summed up the UK’s temperamental divide. “We’re a country that loves to stick two fingers up at the world,” said the writer. “We’re also a nation of common sense,” the lawyer retorted.

Until Cox’s killing, the story of the campaign may have been Remain’s failure to make its economic case resonate. Repeated warnings about the economic devastation that could be wreaked by a Leave vote may have swayed some voters but were dismissed by many others.

“The use of fear is just sickening!” said Keith Thomas, a pensioner in the south coast town of Christchurch, expressing a widely heard outrage at the tactics of David Cameron, prime minister, who at one point argued that the terrorists of Isis would draw comfort from a Leave vote.

————————-

UK’s EU referendum: full coverage and analysis

View the FT’s comprehensive guide to the vote on whether Britain should stay in Europe, with all the latest news, analysis and commentary from both sides of the debate. See more 

————————-

Mr Cameron may have miscalculated, according to Barry Richards, politics professor at Bournemouth university, by failing to appreciate the degree to which the electorate has come to reject the urgings of political leaders and so-called experts — particularly after the 2008 financial crisis.

“There is such a huge reserve that has built up over decades now of distrust among the British electorate,” said Mr Richards, who called the referendum debate “regressive” and “depressing”.

He argues that all but the most sophisticated voters are making decisions based on “feeling — plus a little bit of evidence”, rather than a thorough analysis of the complexities of the EU.

Mr Richards adds: “The referendum is a unique opportunity for people to say, ‘I’m not happy . . . I want things to change’, even if the EU may not be that fundamental to their particular grievances.”

In present-day Britain, those grievances span everything from stagnant wages and pervasive job insecurity to affordable housing, cuts in welfare benefits and strained public services for healthcare and education. Many also feel betrayed by elites in London and Brussels who failed to prevent the financial crisis and championed the euro. 

Tereza Capelos, a political psychologist at Birmingham university, also sees the campaign in dispiriting terms, with fear as its dominant emotion. The Remain campaign has used warnings of post-Brexit property market collapses and budget holes to prevent voters from straying from the status quo. 

Meanwhile, some Leave supporters have sought to channel unease in segments of society into anger at outsiders and elites. One much-criticised Ukip poster showed a queue of asylum seekers in the Balkans, suggesting that they were about to pour into Britain.

“If I had to make a distinction the Remain campaign is more anxious, more afraid; the Leave campaign is more angry,” she said. “Very angry.”

In some cases, Ms Capelos believed that anger had fuelled a kind of righteous zeal among Leavers who believed, as their slogan proclaims, they are “taking back” their nation from hostile forces.

How are we going to live with the consequences? How are we going to live in a society that is so divided?”

Mr Eason, a gregarious man, hails from a contingent of British society with plenty of reason for anger: the survivors of Wales’ devastated coal industry. At various points in his life he has supported and been disillusioned by leaders such as Margaret Thatcher and Tony Blair, prime ministers who presided over south Wales’s long decline.

He has since gravitated to Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader.

Seated at a pub on the night before Cox’s killing, he nodded and applauded as a mostly grey and male cast of fellow Ukipers — several with hearing aids — looked forward to a triumph on Thursday. There were scattered shouts of “traitor!” at the mention of Remain campaigners.

“Enjoy this moment because we are on the verge of victory,” said David Rowlands, recently elected to the Welsh assembly, after 17 years of campaigning. “It’s not an exaggeration to say that we’re the people who saved the country.”

“Hear, hear,” cried the Leavers.

After such an acrimonious campaign, Ms Capelos is worried whether the nation can heal. “What happens on Thursday for me is irrelevant,” she said, posing a larger question for her fellow citizens: “How are we going to live with the consequences? How are we going to live in a society that is so divided?”

