Sacrifice from Dido of TalkTalk presages more cyber regulation

2016-06-20

Dido, Queen of Carthage, expressed anguish by building a pyre and jumping on it. Her namesake Dido Harding, chief executive of TalkTalk, has made a more modest bonfire of her £220,000 bonus following a data breach that cost shareholders £60m. This should please MPs, if they can overlook a £2m incentive payout for prior performance. A group of them has called for chief executives’ pay to be linked in part to data security.

That vague and duplicative proposal is the booming of empty vessels. Parliamentarians make better sense in suggesting companies should be fined for their vulnerability to hack attacks that succeed and for delays in reporting them. Business faces tougher penalties and greater scrutiny over stewardship of information — or the lack of it — as surely as the British summer brings torrential rainfall.

The European Commission wants business to report data breaches to governments. Companies would also have to tell customers about serious information thefts. This would mean telling the press too. 

Even if the UK leaves the EU, it is unlikely companies based here will get away with protecting consumers less than continental peers. Cue shiftiness among big consumer businesses. They have tended to keep quiet about data breaches, where possible. The template has resembled that historically followed by banks when handling staff frauds: boot out the crook, make good the victims and hope Omerta prevails.

Bosses are understandably nervous of the more prescriptive regime that breaches such as TalkTalk’s will create. Baroness Harding was unusual in alerting customers of the broadband business, who were vulnerable to scamming, long before the scale of the data theft was clear. In this she placed principles above pragmatism. But sharper laws should make it easier for executives to serve both causes. 

Condolences via Serco

A great-uncle of Lombard was one of 96,000 British soldiers killed in the Battle of the Somme 100 years ago. The government sent the family a bronze plaque dubbed a “Dead Man’s Penny” by many grieving recipients. That resentful nickname highlights the sensitivity with which the government must deal with service personnel’s next of kin. A Ministry of Defence plan to outsource management of the burial of war casualties and notification of families is therefore fraught with risks.

Privatisation has benefited the public by cutting the cost of services ranging from telecoms to power supply. The MoD is targeting savings of its own. It has advertised for a contractor to run its Defence Business Services unit, for the first time overseeing the delicate duties mentioned.

A private company might not be any worse at this than senior civil servants, though the record of Serco, one possible candidate, is uninspiring.

Competence is not the only issue. If a soldier dies for his country, sympathy should come directly from the nearest proxy. A row erupted in the US in 2004 when it emerged US defence secretary Donald Rumsfeld did not personally sign letters of condolences to families of those killed serving in Iraq. 

It is sophistry to argue that quasi-privatisation of the bereavement services would make no difference to relatives. It would when errors were made. The privatising zeal of Michael Fallon, the abrasive defence minister, has outpaced his empathy. Tactical retreat is his best option.

Brexit bolt-holes

City workers will be ripe for appearances on reality TV if the UK opts to quit the EU:Phil Spencer: Welcome to Location, Location, Location.Kirstie Allsopp: This week we’re helping South Easterners Hamish and Gary. So, guys, you’re planning a new life together abroad?Hamish: We want to hang out in street cafés, visit famous galleries and, most of all, avoid retraining as Uber drivers. Phil: You met at work?Gary: I’m the head of currencies at Omnibank and Hamish runs euro rate swaps. We’re not a couple. We’re colleagues.Phil: That’s what Kirstie keeps saying about me and her, too. Have you considered Zurich? It’s got a super play area for the little ones.Hamish: Some of our subordinates do enjoy Alpine skiing. But we need to be in the eurozone for our jobs.Kirstie: How about Paris? They have some fantastic traditions there.Gary: Bastille day?Kirstie: And air traffic control strikes.Phil: Frankfurt’s better than it was.Gary: That’s how Wolverhampton is sometimes described.Kirstie: Dublin?Hamish: Gary’s from Billericay. He gets panicky further west than EC2.Phil: Seems to me, guys, you two are flirting with relocating while you work out how to stay where you are, no matter what happens. Like half the guests on our TV show.Kirstie: Phil, you’re giving the game away! Sometimes I could spank you!

jonathan.guthrie@ft.com

Delicate service only the MoD can perform / From Mark Lancaster MP

