Japan’s precipitous short yen position

2016-06-20

The year 2015 saw a record 2,508 mountaineering accidents in Japan: a product, the authorities say, of people ascending to great heights without checking the weather. With the UK referendum on Europe looming, something similar is happening in currency markets. Trading floors everywhere are girding themselves for tumult around the referendum result, epically so if the result is for Leave.

Sterling moves are expected to be explosive in that scenario, though ructions can be expected across the G10 currency basket and it may ultimately be the yen – and any intervention by Tokyo to weaken its currency — that detonates the biggest blast. Sterling may have shot up against the dollar on Monday but it is close to a 24-month low against the “safe haven” yen. In Japan, the language of intervention was already in the air, but traders are now dusting-off their Ministry of Finance lexicons in case a leave vote in the UK forces Japan to act. 

The problem is that Japan has inadvertently established a potentially massive amplifier for big moves in the yen. Three years of yen weakness have led corporate Japan to accumulate a record stash of overseas earnings retained in other currencies. Analysts put the combined hoard at about ¥50tn. Add that to the ¥20tn of foreign stock holdings built by Japanese investors over the past few years, says JPMorgan’s Japan forex strategist, and there is an impressively mountainous short yen position. 

This is where the dangerous weather conditions come in. For the moment, that huge position is not making an equivalent impact on markets. The yen has been strengthening, but not so quickly that it has forced Japanese corporates to unwind their holdings in a gush. Brexit could change that in the space of a few hours making a once scaleable mountain suddenly threatening. The yen would surge against sterling and could move even more violently higher against the dollar as global haven trades kick in. A break above ¥100 against the dollar could put intolerable pressure on corporate Japan to repatriate just when markets least want yen strength to be exaggerated. Given the close correlation between the yen and the equity market, the Japanese authorities may have to intervene and sell the yen for the first time since the 2011 Tohoku earthquake. 

leo.lewis@ft.com

