50 ways to hedge your Brexit: Buy the ‘Brex-dip’?

2016-06-21

From ‘keep it simple, stupid’, to ‘buy shekels’, we’ve already brought you a long list of ways to hedge against the UK opting to leave the EU in this week’s vote. Here’s our (probably) final installment:

Gabriel Sterne and Adam Slater at Oxford Economics favour buying the “Brex-dip”*:

Recent FX moves imply a possible 9% further drop in sterling post-Brexit, but our modelling and analysis suggests sterling would be likely to rally after an initial sell-off… Buying sterling on dips after a Brexit vote looks attractive, especially against the euro.

Globally, recent market moves appear overdone, exceeding those we modelled in a very severe Brexit scenario. Markets seem to be pricing the risk of a ‘Lehman Brothers’ moment which we think most unlikely.

For the wary investor, our framework, which looks at asset performance across countries in other recent volatility episodes and crises, offers some pointers to the best short-term Brexit hedges: US and some Asian stocks, the yen and US and UK government bonds – the latter benefitting also from potential UK monetary easing in the event of Brexit.

Darren Ruane, director of fixed income at Investec Wealth says:

We have twice reduced exposure to risk assets (Dec 2015 and March 2016), mainly through selling equities and buying bonds (government, investment grade and high yield corporate). The government bonds were inflation-linked gilts which should benefit from a lower growth and higher inflation (through weak sterling) profile if Brexit occurs.

We continue to believe we are appropriately positioned.

In fixed income, we have holdings in UK Government bonds, which could rise in price; holdings in non-sterling bonds – which should rise in price (if unhedged); Furthermore, holdings in other (corporate) sterling fixed income, should be relatively protected.

In equities, just under half of our equity exposure is in overseas equities, that should benefit from sterling weakness. Our UK equity exposure is over 80% in large caps, whose revenue and profit streams are overwhelmingly global in nature.

Core government bonds are already looking very pricey, says Francesco Garzarelli at Goldman Sachs (a point he has raised before), but they could still blast higher in the event the UK votes to walk, he says:

Should Brexit occur, government bond yields would most likely fall further reflecting the associated increase in macro and financial uncertainty. Typically, large ‘systemic shocks’(e.g., 1998, 2007) can result in 10-year government bond yields declining in fairly short order to as much as 2.0-2.5 sigma from the measure of macro ‘fair value’ prevailing at the time. Applying this logic to current yields, it would not be surprising to see 10-year Gilts falling to just under 1% following the announcement of a ‘Leave’ outcome, German Bunds going to –negative 10/15bp, and US Treasuries rally to around 1.35%.

Andrew Harman, a portfolio manager at First State Investments is accentuating the positive:

Our base case scenario is for a Remain vote to prevail, so we have removed the majority of our short Sterling position, which we have carried all year in anticipation of a close election. At these levels, a lot of risk has already been priced into sterling.

To protect against a Leave event, which we do think will cause significant volatility, we have a large long duration in our UK fund, which should do well in the event of a Leave vote. The extent of damage to UK equities is complicated by the substantial non-UK exposure of the domestic equity index but should we see a market sell-off around the vote, we would look to add to existing credit and/or equity positions.

*Don’t shoot the messenger.

