Li Ka-shing backs Remain in Brexit debate

2016-06-21

Li Ka-shing, the Hong Kong billionaire has given his two cents on the Brexit debate.

But in reality, it’s less about the two cents and more about the $50bn he has on the line – that being the estimated value of business interests in retail, water supply, railway and telecommunications sectors Mr Li has amassed in the UK.

“If Brexit happens, it will be detrimental to the UK and it will have a negative impact on the whole of Europe,” Mr Li said in an interview with Bloomberg Television on Tuesday morning, adding he hoped the UK does not vote in favour the European Union this Thursday.

Mr Li’s Hong Kong-listed companies rallied strongly on Monday, outperforming the Hang Seng’s 1.7 per cent gain. But they’re lagging today, with the benchmark up another 0.4 per cent.

Power Assets Holdings shares are down 0.3 per cent today. The company drew 47.9 per cent of its revenue from the UK in the financial year ended December 31 2015, according to Bloomberg data.

Cheung Kong Infrastructure is down 0.5 per cent today, and drew 28 per cent of its revenue from the UK in FY15. Cheung Kong Property Holdings shares are down 0.4 per cent.

CK Hutchison, Mr Li’s main investment vehicle, is up 0.2 per cent today. It drew 52.5 per cent of its FY15 revenue from Europe.

S&P Global Ratings has said a potential exit from the EU by the UK may have “some impact” on the operational and financial positions of CK Hutchison Holdings, Cheung Kong Infrastructure, Power Asset Holdings, but that their credit ratings are unlikely to be affected. S&P added:

The most immediate risk from a Brexit would be a potential large depreciation in pound sterling, which would reduce cash flows to CKHH, CKI, and PAH as they are translated at a lower rate compared with the functional currency of the group (i.e., the Hong Kong dollar). Also, pound sterling denominated debtwould be translated to a lower amount. The impact, however, would materialize only if the depreciation is prolonged for more than a year, in our view.

S&P said it expected CK Hutchison to have a “sufficient buffer” in its financial position to weather a potential Brexit, noting there is some natural hedge for its GBP-denominated assets and liabilities and that the business portfolio consists of relatively defensive assets.

The ratings agency said the the impact of a potential Brexit on the UK utility assets owned by CKI and PAH own would be minimal, given they generate stable and predictable operating cash flows in local currency.

