Stark divide runs through Britain’s two tribes

2016-06-24

Margot Parker was surrounded by vote-counters at her local polling station in the UK’s industrial Midlands when she — like millions of compatriots — realised early on Friday morning that a two-decade-old campaign to push the UK out of the EU had at last succeeded.

She knew, however, this day was coming at least four years ago. While knocking on doors in a failed bid for office in 2012, Ms Parker, a member of the anti-EU UK Independence party, became convinced Brexit was less a question of “if” but “when”.

“They would say, ‘I’ve lost my job, I can’t pay my mortgage. I’m 40, I feel washed out, I’ve had it’,” she recalled. “A lot of people felt they weren’t being listened to.”

The 17.4m votes cast by Leave supporters on Thursday amount to a collective howl of discontent with the status quo that has now been heard around the world. It shook financial markets from London to Tokyo and may yet reorder global politics.

It also left many metropolitan Remainers in a state of shock — both at the immediate result and the character of a country they thought they understood. It crystallised a stark divide running through a nation — between two tribes of old and young, rural and urban, traditional and metropolitan, and above all those fearful of globalisation, and its beneficiaries.

“When I woke up, I felt like going back to sleep and waking up again to see if it had changed,” said Joe Warner, 30, an app developer, who was consoling himself at a pub in London’s trendy Borough market on Friday afternoon. “I really didn’t envisage this happening.” 

Leave voters — and their gripes — come in all shapes and signs. Months of chronicling them across the UK turned up privately-educated constitutionalists obsessed with questions of sovereignty, furious fishermen, tabloid readers fed a diet of stories about a supposed European army, and older men convinced they were marching — with hearing aids and canes — on one last mission to save the nation like the heroes of Normandy. And many others.

To lower-middle-class England the EU’s benefits seem to go to others, writes David GoodhartRead on

But at its heart, Leave was fuelled by a festering sense of betrayal among legions of working class voters in places that have long felt overlooked by what they perceive as a political and media elite in cosmopolitan London.

“For years they’ve been guilty of not being receptive to people’s genuine fears,” Ms Parker said of the nation’s politicians, adding: “North of the M25 [the London ring road] there’s a very big divide and it’s just become wider and wider.”

When that elite tried to connect with such voters in recent months with dark warnings by David Cameron and top executives about the economic costs of a Brexit, it backfired badly. Many Leavers feel such righteous conviction that a short-term hit to the pocketbook is a small price to pay for something they are convinced will benefit their children and grandchildren. In any case, the warnings from on high left many feeling patronised and manipulated.

“They tried a little fear and it didn’t work. So they tried some more. People just said: ‘Oh, piss off!’” said Rollo Reid, another Ukipper. He added: “There’s a proper people and a proper economy going on in this country that David Cameron doesn’t know about.”

Mr Reid, 72, said he turned to Ukip years ago, after concluding that EU technical standards were unfairly penalising his family’s specialty steel company, Reidsteel, and that there was no way to make his voice heard in a Brussels dominated by big business.

The Leave vote is bad news for Europe’s financial system, not just London, writes Patrick JenkinsRead on

He lives in Christchurch, the south coast town that has a higher percentage of residents over 60 than anywhere else in the UK, and was a Leave stronghold. “They’re not connecting the dots. They’re hopeless!” he said in May, when asked why young voters like Mr Warner overwhelmingly support remaining in the EU.

On Friday morning, Mr Reid was surprisingly calm in triumph. He pointed to an urban regeneration project in the ailing northern city of Rotherham to explain why it should be obvious that voters would be so angry with the EU: Reidsteel was the only British contractor to be involved, he said, because of EU rules that forced open the project to foreign contractors.

“They see Portuguese steel being put up by Polish workers. So you can see why they voted 80-20 to go,” he said.

Foreign workers — and migration, more broadly — may have been the most emotive issue in the referendum campaign. Again and again, Leave campaigners said it was the top concern voters expressed on the doorstep or in market stalls.

To Remain supporters, Leavers’ obsession with migration was evidence of the tribe’s true spirit: xenophobic, racist even, and fearful of outsiders. For many, such suspicions were confirmed by a Ukip poster released last week depicting hordes of dark-skinned migrants lined up to enter Europe. Its tagline: “Breaking point”.

“I’ve been called a racist over and over, throughout the campaign,” said Sue Boucher, a Ukip campaigner in the south Wales valleys that have been fumbling for an economic livelihood since the coal mines collapsed decades ago.

Ms Boucher, who was 14 when her father lost his job, insisted the charge was not fair: Their animus was not against Polish workers, per se, but aimed at the politicians who were unwilling — or unable, because of EU rules — to limit newcomers when they, themselves, were struggling to find decent-paying jobs.

If anything, their contempt for the Labour party, which has long dominated the blue-collar region — and is ostensibly pro-EU — was even stronger.

“My father was a staunch Labour man, working class. It was a given,” she said. “[But] I no longer believe anything the Labour party tells me.”

Vote leave ran the better campaign and have shaken up the establishment, writes Sebastian Payne.Read on

What about all the EU development money that pours into Wales — some £245m each year — that might now evaporate, a visiting reporter from London asked? Ms Boucher merely shrugged and tilted her head, as if to say: look at what all that has yielded. 

Anthony Charles, a retired miner walking with his wife along the high street of Caerphilly, a south Wales town, a week before the referendum, agreed. “I voted Labour all my life,” he said. But at 75, Mr Charles switched his allegiance to Plaid Cymru, the Welsh identity party. “Out!,” he said, without hesitation, when asked about the referendum.

On Friday, Leavers’ frustration turned at last to elation. “I am speechless. I just can’t believe I’m watching this. Since the moment I saw my wife walk towards me on my wedding day, this is the best moment of my life,” said Justin Bellhouse, a local Brexit activist in Berkshire, just minutes after the BBC called the result for Leave. “This is a once in a generation thing.”

Colleagues talked about the many reasons for the result — from the decline of Britain’s once-mighty fishing fleet to industrial decline and the recent surge in migration from eastern Europe. But Mr Bellhouse had a simpler explanation: “The EU got too big for its boots, so people just voted it down.”

Additional reporting by Tobias Buck in Bracknell and Hannah Murphy in London

