Britain takes a leap into the dark

2016-06-24

The people have spoken. Britain’s decision to leave the EU is the biggest shock to the continent since the fall of the Berlin Wall. The repercussions will be felt in the UK, Europe and the west.

More than four decades after joining the European Economic Community, the UK has elected to cut itself adrift. Since 1973, EU membership has anchored its foreign and economic policy. Britain will now leave the bloc of 27 other nations and its guaranteed access to a market of 500m people. It is hard to see a way back.

Throughout the referendum campaign, the Financial Times has argued that leaving the EU would be an act of self-harm. This vote will damage the economy and weaken Britain’s role in the world. It is also a devastating blow to the EU. 

Europe is still struggling with the slowdown in the eurozone and the most severe migration crisis since the second world war. Across the continent, from Paris to Rome and Warsaw, populism is on the march, the establishment in retreat. Britain’s referendum result may well go down in history as “the pitchfork moment”.

For the UK, the vote has turned conventional wisdom on its head. A country renowned for its conservatism and political stability has taken a leap into the dark. Many will blame an inept Remain campaign lacking in passion and massively underestimating the depth of resentment toward the metropolitan elite. Fears about immigration and its impact on local communities — more legitimate than many have admitted — trumped national economic self-interest. The slogan of “taking back control” resonated with people who see Europe as a continent in disarray.

The vote will lead to economic, financial and political uncertainty. David Cameron, who staked all on the referendum, rightly concluded his position was untenable, though he will stay on in the short term to manage an unpredictable transition. Britain needs a government to decide the terms of EU withdrawal and the new relationship with Europe. The Leave campaign has given few clues on either score. Britain cannot expect to retain the benefits of EU membership while shedding the responsibilities. Other EU states should approach the negotiations without rancour. It is in everyone’s interests that Britain and Europe should retain as close and co-operative relationship as possible.

Beyond Westminster, the split of the vote saw strong majorities to stay in London and in Scotland. The country divided between the big cities, the English shires and the Celtic fringes bar Wales. This will inevitably raise questions about the territorial integrity of the UK. It has also exposed the hollowness of the two big parties — the Conservatives and Labour — which have dominated British politics for almost a century.

Across Britain, businesses and investors are today surveying a new landscape. The plunging pound and the collapse in bond yields are harbingers of the turmoil which Britain faces in the absence of clear direction.

It is vital that all parties concerned, from central banks to policymakers in the major capitals, take the necessary steps to avoid a repeat of the Lehman collapse which triggered the 2008 global financial crisis. 

The immediate priority for the UK government must be to stabilise the economy. In the medium term, the country has to find a way to turn this crisis into an opportunity. It will be no easy task. Talk of an “independence day” does not translate into a credible strategy. 

On the other hand, the British are a resourceful people with a proud history. The best hope, which this newspaper fervently shares, is that the UK remains engaged, open and, in the best spirit, pro-European. That way lies the future.

