Federal Reserve inaction does not equate to paralysis

2016-06-16

If modern central banking came with a manual, the tome would undoubtedly be titled “ABC — Always Be Cautious”.

ABC was certainly the leitmotif of this week’s central bank meeting bonanza. The Bank of England, the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of Japan all refrained from action. On Thursday the BoE muttered darkly about “Brexit” risks, while the BoJ grumbled in vain about the yen’s strength. But the real action came from the Fed on Wednesday.

Investors had expected a cautious stance, after a woeful jobs report and with a nerve-racking UK referendum on EU membership on the horizon, but some thought policymakers would hint that a July rate increase was a possibility. Instead, the Fed served up a cautious statement, pessimistic forecasts and a strikingly guarded press conference. The 10-year Treasury yield has duly plunged to its lowest level since August 2012.

Fed chair Janet Yellen said that it was “not impossible” that policymakers could raise rates in July, but investors have shrugged off the feeble attempt at keeping the possibility alive. While there will be clarity on the UK referendum outcome by then, Fed Funds futures indicate that investors only see a roughly 2 per cent chance that the US central bank will tighten. 

What is more remarkable is that markets are implying that there is a two-thirds chance that the Fed is paralysed for the rest of the year. The last time investors were this downbeat on US interest rates, in February, global markets were in the dumps. Essentially, investors are seeing the Fed’s dovishness, and doubling down. As outspoken bond fund manager Jeffrey Gundlach said: “The ‘rate hike cycle’ has left the building.”

Perhaps. But remember, a majority of policymakers still think the Fed should raise interest rates at least twice this year, and three times in 2017. Despite the weak May jobs report, the labour market remains strong, the economy resilient and the inflation forecast was raised. 

The Fed may be cautious, but it is not catatonic. Given depressed yields, even a small shift in rate expectations could deliver a shock to the sparsely-traded summer markets.

robin.wigglesworth@ft.com

