UK banks suffer big share drops after EU referendum result

2016-06-24

Shares in British banks were hit hard on Friday as analysts predicted that the UK’s vote to leave the EU would hit economic growth, cause bad loans to rise, push up funding costs and drag down investment banking revenues.

Regulators have been in contact with the banks, asking them for market intelligence, including a ring around from Prudential Regulation Authority chief Andrew Bailey. The PRA also checked up on the banks’ contingency plans and impact assessments, including how they might need to restructure their operations. 

Banking chiefs lined up to express confidence that they would weather the storm. 

The hardest hit in the sector were Lloyds Banking Group, Barclays and Royal Bank of Scotland, which suffered share price drops of 30-plus per cent at the market open, before a slight recovery to trade down between 17 and 20 per cent by early afternoon.

Mark Garnier, a Conservative MP and member of the Treasury committee, summed up the fears. “I’m really scared for stability of markets, business investment, and what it means for jobs,” he said. “Any hedge funds that trade volatility are going to make a lot of money out of this.”

Mark Carney, Bank of England governor, said on Friday morning that the central bank would make as much as £250bn of liquidity available to support banks through these extraordinary times — but senior bankers said this was unlikely to be necessary.

Most analysts reckon that because big banks were forced to shore up their capital, funding and liquidity positions since the 2008 crisis, they are now in a much stronger position to withstand such a shock. Mr Carney said the capital requirements for big UK banks were 10-times higher than before the crisis.

Huw van Steenis, banks analyst at Morgan Stanley, said the UK [and eurozone] banks sector was “a lightning rod for concern” about the referendum result.

“But this is very different to the financial crisis, banks now have dramatically improved their funding stability and have more than triple the capital than in times past,” he said.

Chirantan Barua, banks analyst at Bernstein, predicted that job losses and lower economic activity and investment in the UK capital would hit mortgage lenders, particularly the market leader — Lloyds. “London is going to get absolutely hammered,” he said. “The buy-to-let guys are the biggest single short today.” 

Europe and US feel impactBanks across Europe and the US were caught up in the negative reaction to the referendum result 

British public takes revenge on City The Leave vote is bad news for Europe’s financial system, not just London, writes Patrick Jenkins

Lombard: Disaster for CityVote to leave the EU will bring extended market volatility, writes Jonathan Guthrie.

Insurance falls heavilyConcerns about London’s insurance market escalate given its big attraction of passporting rights into the EU

Asset managers reelAberdeen Asset Management dropped 32 per cent while Schroders tumbled 17 per cent and Henderson fell 16 per cent in early trading

Lex: UK banks — ouchLenders are in better shape than in 2008 but lower margins and growth will hur

Analysts also predicted that Lloyds and RBS could face the added complication of a potential Scottish referendum on whether to leave the UK, reigniting concerns that the two Edinburgh-based banks will face a costly change in their domicile.

Another worry for banks is whether an exit from the EU will force them to relocate some of their corporate and investment banking operations to the European continent to maintain access to the region’s clients. 

There is also concern over whether the tens of thousands of non-UK citizens employed in the UK financial sector will be able to stay in the country. 

Jes Staley, Barclays chief executive, conceded that this was a worry, saying in a memo to staff: “For those of you who are not UK nationals, but based in the UK, I know that the vote to leave may also raise questions about your own future. I do not pretend to have the answers but I know that our people are the lifeblood of Barclays, regardless of where they’re from, so we will do all we can to support you.” 

Shares in the smaller “challenger” banks — many of which have high exposures to London buy-to-let mortgages — were also hit hard, with Aldermore, Shawbrook and Paragon falling between 15 and 23 per cent. 

Andrew Lowe, banks analyst at Berenberg, said: “The key will be what does this mean for the credit cycle. A lot of these challenger banks are untested in this regard; they haven’t been through them before. That’s the uncertainty.” 

However, Paul Lynam, chief executive of Secure Trust, which represents the UK body of challenger banks, said: “Challengers don’t have the cross-border exposures or currency exposures that [the] largest banks do. They are forced to hold significantly more capital as a consequence of the rules.”

Citigroup analysts have downgraded challenger banks to a “sell” in the view that their loan growth will slow as a result of the expected impact to the economy. “This tougher environment for SMEs is likely to result in slower volume growth, a deterioration in asset quality, and lower margins,” Citi said in a note.

Shares in HSBC and Standard Chartered were down 4 per cent and 6 per cent respectively in London. The two banks have the lowest relative UK and European exposure.

