Political fears hit foreign investment around the world

2016-06-21

Long-term cross-border investments in factories and other projects around the world are expected to fall 10 per cent to 15 per cent this year as companies delay decisions because of political uncertainty, according to the United Nations. 

Global foreign direct investment flows last year reached $1.8tn, their highest level since the 2008 global financial crisis, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development reported on Tuesday in its latest World Investment Report. 

That was good news for a global economy stuck in a low-growth path that is prompting anxiety among policymakers. But the prospects for this year were already dimmer, Unctad economists warned. They predicted a fall “reflecting the fragility of the global economy” and pointed to a weak start to the year. 

According to figures shared with the Financial Times the value of cross-border mergers and acquisitions was down 21 per cent in the first four months of this year while the value of announced greenfield projects was down 3.5 per cent. 

The change is particularly stark in developed economies. In 2015 they saw a bumper year with an almost doubling of flows into the US, Europe and other advanced economies leading them to grab 55 per cent of global FDI flows. But in the first four months of this year, according to Unctad data, the value of greenfield projects announced in developed economies was down 23.4 per cent while cross-border M&A activity was down 18.6 per cent. 

James Zhan, head of Unctad’s investment division and one of the world’s leading experts on FDI flows, said the figures reflected an enduring sense of uncertainty in the global economy. That, he said, was being fed above all by political questions surrounding everything from this week’s “Brexit” referendum in the UK to the November presidential vote in the US and next year’s national elections in France and Germany. 

“The world’s FDI recovery remains bumpy,” he said. “Uncertainty is very high.” 

The world’s FDI recovery remains bumpy,” he said. “Uncertainty is very high

“Barring the second half of the year there being some really, really mega deals we don’t expect there to be much growth in 2016,” Mr Zhan said. 

In its report Unctad said it expected FDI flows to grow modestly again in 2017 and not to surpass last year's $1.8tn global total until 2018. 

Experts warn that monthly and even quarterly FDI figures can be volatile. But the latest figures point to a world where many of the patterns that fed the growth in 2015 are being tested or even going into reverse. 

For example, the US last year attracted a record $348bn in foreign direct investment. But in the first quarter of 2016, FDI inflows were down 62 per cent at $76bn. 

Growing trend noted as antitrade rhetoric around the world surges

FDI inflows into China in the first five months of this year were up 4 per cent to $54.2bn. However, outflows from China — which is becoming a vital new source of FDI in the world — fell from $2bn in the first quarter of 2015 to a negative $355m. 

According to Unctad last year’s surge in global FDI was driven largely by an increase in M&A activity. That itself was partly driven by corporate reconfigurations, including so-called tax “inversion” deals in which companies used a merger to change domicile and lower their tax bill. 

In the first four months of 2016, the value of cross-border M&A deals concluded was $254bn, down 21 per cent from the $321bn in the same period of 2015. The decline was reflected across all regional and economic groupings, Mr Zhan said, with developing economies seeing a 43 per cent fall. 

The value of greenfield investment projects announced around the world in the first quarter of this year, he said, declined by 4 per cent to $183bn. 

That global figure was the result of two very different pictures for developing and developed economies, however. The value of greenfield investments in developing economies was up almost 12 per cent at $125bn in the first quarter of 2016 while developed economies saw a 23 per cent fall in the value of greenfield projects to $52.7bn. 

