The Archers: Ambridge awaits the Brexit verdict

2016-06-16

If Britain votes to leave the European Union next week, there will be ructions across the country: in the financial markets, boardrooms, government and civil service. But there will also be panic in the fictional English village of Ambridge, home to BBC Radio 4’s long-running daily soap opera, The Archers. 

The scriptwriters have already developed storylines for September and they are banking on the country remaining in the EU. However, Graham Harvey, the agricultural adviser on the series, says: “We’re used to reacting quickly”. After all, Mr Harvey and his fellow writers had to tear up their scripts in 2001, when foot-and-mouth, a disease affecting livestock, swept the countryside. 

Nonetheless, from a story point of view, Britain’s departure from the EU would be “interesting”, observes Mr Harvey. A significant part of UK farmers’ incomes come from the Common Agricultural Policy and “our farmers will be thinking how they will survive”. He ponders the long-term implications of post-Brexit trade talks for storylines. “There would be a lot of Brexit. We’d be thankful for village fetes and the [Rob-Helen Titchener] trial.”

Mr Harvey, who has worked on the series for 31 years, emphasises that the BBC, as a public broadcaster, must portray both sides of the argument over the June 23 EU referendum. Recent debates on the soap have presented an amicable — anodyne, even — discussion between Adam Macy (Leave) and David Archer (Remain) on the potential impact on farming subsidies. 

Recently the National Farmers Union came out in favour of remaining, arguing that losing subsidies would destroy the livelihoods of many farmers. In 2015 UK farmers received more than €3bn in direct payments. Mr Harvey speaks to local farmers in Taunton, south-west England, where he lives. He says opinion is divided over how to vote. 

Speaking personally, Mr Harvey bel­ieves Britain should remain part of the EU: “My father’s and grandfather’s lives were wrecked by war. I like being part of Europe. It’s a bigger issue than income.” He is not a fan of farming subsidies, believing they distort the market. 

Farming is the topic of his new book, Grass-Fed Nation, which argues that animals that graze on grass are far healthier than those fed on chemically enhanced grains. It is also better for the countryside, as well as consumers of meat and dairy products. Mr Harvey laments that Britain’s traditional small mixed farms have given way to larger intensive ventures, relying on chemicals and cooped-up animals. “Farmers could be doing better than they are,” he says. “There is too much money going to suppliers of chemicals and technology.” 

In the book, he writes: “If we reared grazing animals solely on their natural food, grass, we’d be growing far fewer cereal crops with their heavy requirement for fossil fertilisers and pesticides. We would, in fact, far exceed our carbon emission targets.” 

In part, his desire to challenge overreliance on processed foodstuffs and chemicals came from realising that his own health was suffering from high cholesterol, raised glucose and blood pressure due to the amount of sugar and white flour he was packing in. 

Mr Harvey grew up on a council housing estate in Reading, west of London. His father worked on the river Thames, inspecting locks, and his mother was a housewife. Yet beyond the concrete, at the end of his road, was countryside. It sparked an enduring in­terest in agriculture, which he studied at Bangor university. He became a journalist at Farmers Weekly before moving into script writing, joining The Archers in 1984.

It was at university that he was sucked into becoming a fan of The Archers. He and fellow students would sit round the radio to listen to the soap, which first aired nationwide in 1951 as “an everyday story of country folk”. He was called in for a scriptwriting trial after sending in three days’ worth of stories on spec. 

Despite being the agricultural adviser, overseeing the storylines that deal with tractors and milking, he contributes to other stories, including the big one: Rob and Helen Titchener. The unfolding depiction of domestic abuse has become a national talking point, reaching its climax in April when pregnant Helen stab­bed her husband. Radio, says Mr Harvey, is the perfect medium for such stories. “Radio gives you that feeling that you have gone behind closed doors and seen into their lives.” 

He disagrees with complaints from some listeners that the storyline is sensationalist. “Rob and Helen are part of life in England. These are stories about relationships.” Annoyingly, he remains silent on the outcome of Helen’s trial. 

Former athletes land consultancy work and speaking gigs but are they any good?

He prefers some characters to others. Among his favourites are Eddie and Clarrie Grundy because he used to feel like he was “sitting in their kitchen”. He also has a particular fondness for Brian Aldridge, despite the character’s fondness for buying new kit and chasing profits. “I know lots of far­mers like him who started in the 1970s, an expansive time.” Some characters he does “not get on with”, such as Rex and Toby Fairbrother, a former City worker, who are trying to get a poultry business going. (“I don’t feel they are solid, Toby is a chancer.”)

The drama in The Archers is not just in stabbings and judicial trials but also in agriculture. Before the show’s 65th anniversary, Sean O’Connor, the programme’s editor, tantalised listeners with hints of a “defining moment”. So there was discontent when the big rev­eal turned out not to be about marital discord, but the future of David Archer’s dairy farm, Brookfield. For Mr Harvey the twist — changing the breed of cows, and how they are grazed — was a validation of the importance of agriculture to the show, whose roots lie in promoting countryside issues on behalf of the Ministry of Agriculture. It also reflects conversations taking place in farmhouses across the country about the crisis in the dairy industry.

I tell Mr Harvey that I have lots of friends — admittedly city-dwellers — who dislike the insular life portrayed in The Archers. It is a world, he says, that is familiar to him but also appeals to urban and suburban listeners, for constructing a cosy and reassuring village where people are generally nice to each other. “We want to believe in that world,” he says.

emma.jacobs@ft.comTwitter: @emmavj

Archers scriptwriters are making no assumptions / From Alison Hindell

