EU ‘foolish’ to erect trade barriers against Britain

2016-06-22

A German industry leader has warned Brussels against responding to a British departure from the EU with a tough trade regime, saying it would be “very, very foolish” to erect barriers. 

The Brexit campaign immediately claimed the comments undermined a key plank of the Bremain camp — that leaving the EU would spell doom for British trade in Europe.

The remarks from Markus Kerber, managing director of the BDI, the employers’ group, follow weeks of effort from chancellor Angela Merkel and most of the German political and business establishment to minimise interventions in the Brexit debate. 

Even though Berlin wants Britain to stay, political and business leaders have mostly refrained from speaking out for fear of inadvertently providing ammunition to the Brexit campaign. 

Speaking to the BBC, Mr Kerber said: "Imposing trade barriers, imposing protectionist measures between our two countries — or between the two political centres, the European Union on the one hand and the UK on the other — would be a very, very foolish thing in the 21st century.” 

He added: "The BDI would urge politicians on both sides to come up with a trade regime that enables us to uphold and maintain the levels of trade we have, although it will become more difficult." 

Boris Johnson, the leading Brexit campaigner, welcomed what he said was the “truth” from German industry. “After the incessant doom-mongering of the In campaign, we now hear the truth from the 'voice of German industry' — that they would be desperate for free trade after we vote Leave. 

“Of course EU countries will continue trading with us on a tariff-free basis — they would be damaging their own commercial interests if they didn’t. That's why EU politicians would be banging down the door for a trade deal on Friday.” 

Mr Kerber later told the Financial Times that he had been “misunderstood”. He said he had not intended to give the impression that there would be little change in the trade relationship between Britain and the remaining EU. “Logically, trade barriers would not be as low as they are today. That is the point of a single market,” he said. 

“However, it would be a foolish thing for the EU to punish the UK. I would not want Great Britain to stop producing the Mini. Why would I?” The Mini is manufactured in the UK by the German motor group BMW.” 

Mr Kerber added that he wanted the UK to stay in the EU. “For me, it is beyond doubt: the British are for us on the continent a crucial partner. We continental Europeans need them to implement structural reforms and become more competitive. We need them to deepen the European single market. We need them to secure access to new markets. Europe’s gains an unlimited amount from a strong British partner in the EU.”

