The Outers’ message resonated with those who feel left behind

2016-06-24

Why do so many British voters feel resentment towards an EU that so many other British voters regard, if not with love, then as a benign embodiment of modernity?

It is all about social class, age, education and mobility. This has been Britain’s most class-based vote of recent decades, with the normal cross-class alliances dissolving into an early-21st-century “peasants’ revolt”. 

According to all the pollsters, the lower down the social and educational ladder you descend the greater likelihood that someone will have voted Leave, while the best markers for Remainers is having a degree and being aged 18 to 29.

The so-called “ left behind” voters — old, white, blue-collar — formed a core of Leave voters, along with a more middle-class Tory phalanx, but the anti-EU message has also resonated with a larger group of middling Britons. 

This is about worldview and values as much as income. The sociologist Talcott Parsons used to distinguish between people with “achieved” and “ascribed” identities.

The former have, typically, done well at school, left home to go to university and then climbed a professional hierarchy — their sense of themselves is based on their achievements and they are thus comfortable with social and geographical mobility. The EU suits them.

The latter derive their identity much more from group and place — more than 60 per cent of British citizens still live within 20 miles of where they lived aged 14 — and are thus much more easily discombobulated by mass immigration and social change in general. The EU does not work so well for them.

They are not, in the main, angry in a brick-throwing sort of way, but feel slighted by the declining status of so much non-graduate employment and rapid demographic change that no one consulted them about. 

Moreover, many are unmoored from traditional political parties and no longer feel that their mobile elites are looking out for them.

To lower-middle-class England the EU’s benefits seem to go to others, while they pick up the bill

Remainers will note that this has little to do with the EU. But to lower-middle-England the bloc’s benefits usually seem to go to others — young British professionals working in Berlin or Paris, migrants from Poland or Romania who bring competition for jobs and services — while they pick up the bill and live with ever more remote decision-making.

If there is one big lesson to draw from the surprising success of the Brexit campaign it is surely that Britain’s political class has consistently underestimated the negative consequences — psychological, economic and social — of greater global (and European) interconnection on poorer people. 

What may also have been missed, especially on the left, is that while many people in the top 25 per cent of the educational and economic hierarchy have become less attached to national social contracts in the past couple of generations, others have actually become more dependent on them. The national welfare state has been expanding — think tax credits and the growth of housing benefit — and although state employment has been in decline, if you live in a rundown area, you are more likely than ever to be a state employee.

News, comment and analysis on the referendum to decide whether Britain will leave the EU.

Moreover, the loss of close, industrial communities over the past few decades might well have produced a stronger attachment to the imagined community of the nation and its social supports. 

Disappointed liberals are right to point to a streak of irrationality among some core Leavers: when asked how much people trust official statistics, more than 75 per cent of those earning more than £3,700 a month say they do, while only 27 per cent of those earning less than £1,200 a month agree. 

Liberals are right too that some Leavers are xenophobes. But most, I would contend, are more accurately described as liberal populists— wary of rapid change, mildly nationalistic and with somewhat socially conservative views — but also suspicious of authority and bloody-mindedly keen on their rights (and usually those of minorities too).

Such people deeply resent being dismissed as “Powellites”, code in Britain for racists, as two of Britain’s leading liberal commentators described the Leave campaign in the days running up to Thursday’s vote. It seems that GK Chesterton’s “people of England that have never spoken yet” have been so aroused by the condescension of the expert classes that they spoke their mind with a force that has reverberated across the entire continent of Europe. 

The writer is director of the Integration Hub at Policy Exchange 

