ETFs in demand after Brexit vote

2016-06-24

Hugely volatile swings across financial markets following the UK’s vote to leave the EU led to one of the busiest days on record for providers of exchange traded funds. 

ETFs have become widely used by investors as a quick way to put money to work in tactical trades during periods of heightened volatility. The shock Brexit vote left many investors scrambling to adjust their positions as financial markets had priced in a remain vote in the run-up to the referendum. 

ETFs linked to the FTSE 100 index, UK financial stocks, sterling and gold all saw trading volumes spike following the Brexit vote. Leveraged and inverse ETFs that allow investors to multiply their bets on asset price moves also saw demand increase. 

“It has been a whirlwind of a day,” said Townsend Lansing, an executive director with ETF Securities in London. 

BlackRock, the world’s largest fund manager, registered its busiest day of the year for ETF trading in Europe with $4.5bn iShares ETFs changing hands. Average daily trading volumes for iShares in Europe in May were $1.3bn. 

“It has been an exceptionally busy day for ETF trading. We saw some de-risking, illustrated by strong buying of gold ETFs and selling of developed market equity ETFs. But we also saw other strong buying later in the session for our FTSE and Dax ETFs,” said Ursula Marchioni, chief strategist for iShares in Europe at BlackRock. 

Around 81.3m units of the iShares FTSE 100 ETF were traded, compared with average daily volumes in May of 4.7m units. 

The FTSE 100 index dropped 8.7 per cent during Friday morning but recovered to close at 6,138, down 3.2 per cent on the day. 

“We have seen a lot of business in FTSE 100 ETFs on both sides, buying and selling. We don’t have final figures yet but this has undoubtedly been one of our busiest days on record,” said Adam Laird, senior analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, the fund supermarket.

He added that some investors had moved into cash ahead of the referendum and were now using ETFs to move into safer asset classes. 

Mr Lansing said complete data on ETF activity would not be available for several days until all trades were fully settled so inflows might be even higher than initial estimates. 

“Flows in response to Brexit have been massive,” said Juergen Blumberg, head of capital markets at Source. He estimated that Source’s ETFs had already seen six times its average daily trading volume for 2016 by the end of the morning session on Friday. 

WisdomTree, the US asset manager, also saw a marked rise in ETF trading volumes. 

Nizam Hamid, WisdomTree Europe’s ETF strategist, added: “We have seen a lot more trading than normal, particularly in our short ETPs [that allow investors to profit if asset prices decline].”

Mr Hamid highlighted a rise in inflows into WisdomTree’s short Italian equity ETP, suggesting this pointed to growing concerns among investors that Euroscepticism could gather pace in other European countries following the Brexit vote. 

