Banks lead recovery in UK and European markets

2016-06-21

UK banking stocks rebounded sharply on Monday, as narrowing opinion polls helped reverse some of the recent losses sustained in the lead-up to Thursday’s referendum on EU membership.

Barclays rose 6.7 per cent, while Royal Bank of Scotland climbed 7 per cent and Lloyds added 7.6 per cent. The gains extended across Europe — the Euro Stoxx banks index rose 3.6 per cent.

Shares in financials, seen by many investors as a proxy for the broader economy, have suffered over the past month as the referendum debate has gathered pace. The European bank index on Thursday touched its lowest level since August 2012. 

Analysis points to likely beneficiaries of either outcome

Monday’s gains for banks came as polls on the UK referendum narrowed, the pound rose and sovereign bond yields in the UK and Germany edged higher, after touching new lows last week. The phenomenon of ultra-low yields has triggered warnings over the impact on bank earnings in future.

“We do think that higher bond yields, alongside a sense of relief if we do vote to remain in, will be something greeted very well by European stocks in general and banks in particular,” said David Stubbs, global market strategist at JPMorgan Asset Management. 

“If you want to get a whole country, the first thing you do is buy the financials,” he added. “If you’re an equity investor they are the proxy by which you play the expectations for better economic outcomes if we stay in.” 

Bank bonds, which institutions sell to fund the loans they make, have also moved sharply over recent days, and rebounded on Monday. So-called coco bonds, the riskiest class of bank debt which are exposed when a bank takes losses, rallied in price. A £1bn coco bond sold by Barclays, seen as one of the UK’s most international names, was up 3.2 per cent to 94.2p on the pound.

Lloyd Harris, an analyst at Old Mutual, said banks and insurance companies are the “best value trade” out there, because of the extent to which they have already sold off.

“As the polls have come back, and the bookmakers odds are a little less, you could lose a lot of money if you’re short these bonds,” he said. “I think it’s more short covering at this stage rather than investors adding a lot of risk into the referendum.”

Price volatility is a major risk for investors tempted by the prospect of further short-term gains on the back of changes in sentiment.

“We could get some polls out tomorrow that show Leave back in the lead, and we could see a similar amount off some of these names,” said Mr Harris. “It’s tread with caution at this stage until we know more. It’s still a very, very binary outcome on this.”

Banks have suffered from Brexit sentiment further afield. US banks, as part of stress tests, have flagged to regulators their concerns over how a British exit from the EU would affect their business. 

Brexit is the latest issue to confront Europe’s banking sector— the Euro Stoxx banks index has lost nearly a quarter of its value this year. Earlier in 2016, bank share prices tumbled dramatically, with investors pointing to loose monetary policy, low growth expectations and the volume of non-performing loans still hampering the continent’s financial sector.

“If you look at European banks, there are obviously issues much wider and greater than Brexit,” said Mr Stubbs. 

