Brussels blog: A dark turn

2016-06-17

Westminster is in mourning. Campaigning is on hold. The grief over the murder of Jo Cox MP is raw and palpable. The implications for Britain at this historic juncture are hard to predict. Six days out from the referendum, in the midst of an angry and shrill campaign, politics has suddenly taken a different hue. This was a dark moment for democracy in Britain and an unbearable tragedy for one young family. Start your reading with Alex Massie of the Spectator on a day of infamy.

My fearless friend, a five-foot bundle of Yorkshire grit (Mitchell, Telegraph)

From activist to party star, a path of altruism (Pickard/Allen, FT)

The short slide from civilisation to barbarism (The Guardian)

An anti-tribal heroine in a world of identikit politics (Fraser, Telegraph)

With warmth, sincerity and humanity she made her mark (The Times)

Statement from Brendan Cox, Jo’s husband

“Today is the beginning of a new chapter in our lives. More difficult, more painful, less joyful, less full of love. I and Jo’s friends and family are going to work every moment of our lives to love and nurture our kids and to fight against the hate that killed Jo.

Jo believed in a better world and she fought for it everyday of her life with an energy, and a zest for life that would exhaust most people. She would have wanted two things above all else to happen now, one that our precious children are bathed in love and two, that we all unite to fight against the hatred that killed her.”

Martinez on Martinez France’s most prominent union baron has given a defiant interview to a group of journalists including the FT. He dug in, but there are some hints that he is recognising his protest movement against labour reforms is facing an uphill task as public support melts away.

Croatia’s government falls Lawmakers in Zagreb unseated the prime minister Tihomir Oreskovic on Thursday evening, triggering the collapse of his fragile centre-right ruling ​coalition. Early elections may be necessary. For some insightful context,​it is worth reading Tony Barber’s recent piece on Croatia, Mitteleuropa and illiberal democracy.

Europe’s top diplomat Die Welt has a charming profile of Helga Schmid, the newly appointed head of the EU diplomatic service and “the most powerful German in Brussels”. She was the great Stakhanovite of the Iran nuclear talks with a disarming style and a knack for winning the confidence of EU high representatives. She always has a suitcase packed in her office. Her replacement as political director at the External Action Service was tipped to be a Brit – Sir Simon Gass. Probably best to wait for that referendum.

Juncker on manoeuvres Jean-Claude Juncker made his appearance at the St Petersberg summit, making the case for talking to Russia. Lest the sanctions hawks be aggrieved, he also released a letter cranking up the pressure on the Nord Stream 2 pipeline, which many of those hawks want to stop. He promised the Commission review would look beyond the scheme’s legality to consider the political and security issues of it too. If true, that may help opponents delay the project – but without legal purchase, it is harder to see how it could be stopped.

Turkish realpolitik Look past the aggressive posturing, and there are some signs that Turkish foreign policy is in compromise mode. Ankara has paid a heavy price since it shot down a Russian jet – the tourism industry has been devastated – and it looks like it is seeking to patch up relations. On Germany too, while the rhetoric has been aggressive over the Armenia genocide vote, the dealmaking hasn’t stopped.

Divorce ploys The EU lawyers have been let loose on trying to work out how to strong-arm an uncooperative Brexit government that refuses to invoke the article 50 “exit clause” in the bloc’s treaty. Options include stretching the meaning of a “notification” and potentially threatening to suspend Britain’s rights in the single market. Imaginative stuff – never doubt the ingenuity of EU lawyers.

Matthew d’Ancona has an indispensable insider account of the fringe idea that gripped the Conservative party and brought Britain to the verge of Brexit. Enjoy the description of the 1990s conservative salon where Norman Lamont’s features “twitched like a mischievous badger” as the former chancellor broke the taboo on discussing leaving the EU.

Economist editorial: divided we fall 

Referendum Britain: facts debased, stunts inflated, conviction sidelined (Bagehot, Economist)

Time for Germany think differently on Brexit (Posener, Carnegie)

Brexit: when orderly Imperial retreat turned into a rout (Ascherson, NYT)

Would Brexit be good for the US? (Haas/Fonte, American Interest)

The campaigns are suspended but the markets are still active, attempting to make sense of what will happen next week.

As the chart shows, there was choppy trading in currency markets as sterling fell against the dollar in response to two polls showing the Leave campaign sustaining its lead, before turning around as traders interpreted the killing as meaning the prospect of an EU exit were reduced.

