US utilities left behind Brexit relief rally

2016-06-20

Utilities stocks were left behind as US equities rallied on Monday with investors pivoting away from havens on cooling worries about this week’s British referendum vote on EU membership. 

The sector was the only one in the red as the S&P 500 rallied 0.6 per cent. Utilities were down by 0.4 per cent. 

Utilities are favoured during times of financial market turbulence because of their consistent dividend yields and have been in vogue this year as volatility has flared up repeatedly over issues ranging from worries about the US economy, to China, and most recently, the upcoming Brexit referendum. 

However, a jolt of bullishness swept across global financial markets on Monday as polling pointed to a resurgence in strength for the Remain camp ahead of the UK referendum on Thursday over whether the country should part ways with the EU. 

Indeed, a Financial Times analysis of polling data suggest the two sides were locked in a dead heat. 

Duke Energy, a large power utility, was one of the worst performers on the S&P 500 utilities index, declining by 1.2 per cent to $82, while Consolidated Edison fell by 0.9 per cent to $77.16. 

The two largest US telecommunications groups had a mixed day. AT&T ticked up by 0.1 per cent to $40.78 while Verizon Communications was little-changed at $53.76. 

Economically sensitive groups moved higher on Monday. 

US lenders, which have struggled in 2016, climbed, with the S&P 500 banks index rising by 0.6 per cent. 

Among the advancers were Fifth Third Bancorp, a regional bank, which climbed 1 per cent to $18.40, and heavyweight Citigroup, which rose by 0.8 per cent to $42.80. 

At the close, the S&P 500 was up 0.6 per cent to 2,083.3, the Dow Jones Industrial Average advanced by 0.7 per cent to 17,804.9, and the Nasdaq Composite tacked on 0.8 per cent to 4,837.2. 

The early rally on Monday brought the S&P 500 within less than 2 per cent of the all-time high it struck in May 2015, before it pulled back. 

Volatility gauges also dropped after surging over the past three weeks. The Vix index, a measure of implied S&P 500 volatility over the next month, fell by 5.4 per cent to 18.4, below its long-term average of 20. 

Still, market strategists warned that events this week, including Federal Reserve chief Janet Yellen’s remarks to the US Congress on Tuesday and Wednesday, may still spark ructions in the financial markets. 

“We’ll all get off one rollercoaster only to get on another,” said Peter Boockvar, chief market analyst at The Lindsey Group.

Elsewhere, the shares of Murphy Oil jumped 6 per cent to $31.10 after a brokerage upgraded its view on the oil exploration and production company. 

Raymond James analyst Pavel Molchanov increased his rating on the stock to “market perform” from “underperform”. 

He said he had “become convinced” that the company’s dividend was “safe”.

Dividends have been an important tool used by energy groups to attract investors in recent years but the fall in crude oil prices has forced them to sharply cut back on spending and also called into question whether companies in the sector will be able to continue to afford these shareholder-friendly programmes. 

