Donald Trump hails UK ‘independence’ vote

2016-06-24

Donald Trump has welcomed the decision by British voters to leave the EU and “take their country back”, pointing to a “big parallel” with his rise in America.

Speaking at his golf course in Turnberry in Scotland, Mr Trump said voters in Britain, the US and beyond wanted more say in their countries’ future.

“People want to take their country back, they want independence in a sense,” Mr Trump said. “Come November, the American people will have the chance to re-declare their independence.”

Mr Trump compared the Brexit referendum result to his victory in the Republican presidential primaries, which saw him rise from being seen as a joke candidate to beating 16 rivals. The US has also witnessed a growing populist mood, with voters expressing anger at experts and status quo politicians in Washington.

“People see a big parallel, not only with the US but other countries,” he said.

Mr Trump said President Barack Obama’s comments during a visit to London that Britain would be at the “back of the queue” to negotiate a trade deal if it left the EU had helped swing the vote in favour of the Leave camp.

“If [he] had not said it . . . the result might have been different,” he said. “That would not happen with me . . . the UK will always be in the front of the line.”

Hillary Clinton, the Democratic presidential candidate, implicitly criticised her rival, saying that the uncertainty manifest in the Brexit decision “underscores the need for us to pull together to solve our challenges as a country, not tear each other down”. 

Mr Trump was visiting Turnberry where he has spent £200m to renovate the historic Ayrshire golf course. He arrived on a helicopter bearing his name and wearing his trademark “Make America Great Again” baseball cap. During the referendum campaign, some Leave activists had echoed his mantra by adopting the slogan “Make Britain Great Again”.

Mr Trump was one of the few international political figures — alongside French National Front leader Marine Le Pen — to suggest that Britons should leave the EU. Mr Obama on Friday said the “United Kingdom and the European Union will remain indispensable partners of the United States”.

Mr Trump also showed little sympathy for David Cameron, who announced his intention to resign as prime minister following the referendum vote. 

“David Cameron is a good man, but he was wrong on this,” he said. “He didn’t understand the mood of his country right.” 

People want to take their country back, they want independence in a sense . . . People want to secure their borders, they don’t want people coming in from they don’t know where

There were no prominent Scottish politicians to welcome Mr Trump’s arrival in the country as they digested the outcome of the EU referendum. The ruling Scottish National Party was left to ponder whether to trigger a new independence referendum, just two years after Scots voted to stay within the British union. All 32 Scottish local authorities voted to remain in the EU.

Mr Trump discouraged another independence vote, but said that “it was up to the people of Scotland”. 

“I don’t know whether [the Scottish people] will want to go through that again,” he said. “I was here during that period. It was a nasty period. But the people may decide differently.”

Latest updates on the political and market fallout

Even before his call for Brexit, Mr Trump had inspired the ire of Scotland’s left-leaning ruling elite. His calls to ban Muslims from entering the US and divisive remarks on women and immigrants led Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, to strip Mr Trump of his status as a “Global Scot” business ambassador. 

A group of leftwing activists protested his presence during the ceremonial ribbon cutting at Turnberry, which reopened weeks ago. 

One interrupted his press conference, greeting the course’s owner with what he called “Trump Turnberry golf balls”, featuring swastikas. 

“Get him out,” said Mr Trump, before guards bundled the protester away.

Mr Trump has previously traded insults with Alex Salmond, the SNP’s combative former leader, who has argued it would be “better for Scotland” if Mr Trump sold up and shipped out. Mr Trump has described Mr Salmond as a “stupid bull”. 

But grateful for the economic boost he has provided, Turnberry locals have provided Mr Trump with a rare pocket of support within Scotland. A bed and breakfast owner in the nearby village of Maidens called him a “gentleman” but admitted he “can rile people up”. Staff at the grounds honoured their boss by wearing red baseball caps emblazoned with the words: “Made Turnberry Great Again.”

His visit to Scotland, where he has an ancestral connection, provided relief from recent troubles on the campaign trail. Mr Trump’s mother, Mary MacLeod, was born on the remote Hebridean island of Lewis. Aged 18, she left for a holiday in New York, where she met a real estate developer called Fred Trump and made the US her home.

Mr Trump’s fall out with the pro-European SNP began over the party’s support of a £230m offshore wind farm near his other Scottish golf course in Menie in northeastern Aberdeenshire. In 2014, he said the 11-turbine project was a “disaster” comparable with the Lockerbie plane bomb that killed 270 people.

What the vote means for trade, immigration and growth has yet to be determined

“Wind farms are a disaster for Scotland, like Pan Am 103,” he told The Irish Times. “They’re an abomination and are only sustained with government subsidy . . . People don’t want them near their homes ruining property values.”

Mr Trump has argued the wind farm will ruin the view from his golf course but has failed in repeated court challenges to its construction. 

The property mogul has radically redesigned Turnberry’s 115-year-old Alisa Course, and refurbished its 103-hotel and ballroom with gold adornments. 

He has imprinted his mark on the “Trump Turnberry”, erecting a 24 metre flagpole, complete with a 70 square metre Saltire flag that dominates the surrounding coastline. Whisky and wine bottles at the resort bear his name in gold type. The renovations have been handled by Mr Trump’s son, Eric, who personally chose and positioned the hotel’s 192 chandeliers.

