Brexorcism

2016-06-24

Just a few months ago the idea that Britons would vote to leave the EU seemed implausible. But to the shock of the world, that’s what they just did. A short while back the idea of Donald Trump as president seemed equally inconceivable. Does the Brexit vote tell us we should now upgrade the odds of him winning?

That’s been the question occupying the US political class today. And there are some striking similarities between the fears and frustrations of Trump supporters and the people who voted to wrench the UK out of the 28-member EU. Brexit voters tended to be white, older, and less educated, and felt excluded from the benefits of economic growth. They saw turning their backs on Brussels as a way to exorcise the malign influences of immigration, globalisation and the pampered prancers of the western establishment – bugbears familiar to many a Trump voter.

Trump – who found himself in the UK at one of his Scottish golf courses – bought into the comparisons. “I think I see a big parallel,” he said. “A lot of people are talking about that. And not only the United States, but other countries. People want to take their country back.”

Gérard Araud, France’s ambassador to the US, tweeted that Brexit was “the British version of the populism engulfing all western democracies”. Juanita Duggan, an influential lobbyist and head of the National Federation of Independent Businesses, told me: “The middle class feels betrayed and is fed up with a government that feels distant. In the UK they see their unelected bureaucrats as the EU, and in the US we have such a large country that Washington is distant from the lives of most people.” The upshot, said Chuck Todd, NBC’s well-respected political director, is that Brexit is “a reminder of why we, the political or media elite, need to not underestimate Donald Trump”.

The parallels, however, are imperfect. White voters make up a lower portion of the US electorate than Britain’s, which is why Trump’s fraught relations with ethnic minorities are such a problem. What’s more, despite Trump’s upending of political orthodoxy, the US election is still being fought within Democratic-vs-Republican boundaries, at least in rough terms. In the UK, the referendum was remarkable for the way it split votes across party lines, with members of both main parties turning against each other.

It seems to me that the surest conclusion to draw from Brexit is this: whatever it is that scares voters, they are not as scared as we thought they were of following through to overturn the status quo. Hillary Clinton is in many ways the candidate of the status quo, so as my colleague Edward Luce points out, she now “needs to find a much better way of making a positive case for her presidency”.

Thanks for reading. Have a great weekend. – Barney Jopson, US Policy Correspondent

Follow us all on Twitter: @barneyjopson @Dimi and @Courtney_FT

Long reads of the week

Drawing the line A long look at how a flood of money won statehouses throughout the country for Republicans, who used them to redraw congressional districts and turned America from blue to red. (New Yorker)

Tim Kaine: top Clinton VP pick The Virginia senator – and former governor – is seen by many as the safest bet, with the least upside but also, crucially, the least downside (including a governor who will appoint a Democratic successor should be become vice president). But the selection process has been complicated by uncertainty among Democrats about whether Trump will be the nominee. (Politico)

Protectionist rhetoric rattles business All that anti-free trade talk is starting to get under the skin of the business community – and may hamper US efforts to attract foreign investment, which could undermine one of the Obama administration’s economic success stories. (FT)

Being Chelsea Clinton The once and possibly future first daughter has maintained her privacy even while enjoying the influence and access her fame provides – but she may not be able to have it both ways if her mother wins in November. (Atlantic)

Will Trump swallow the GOP whole? A long look at the identity crisis roiling the Republican party. (NYT)

Who is Hope Hicks? She’s the spokeswoman for the Republican nominee but she doesn’t talk to reporters or do interviews – including this one, which instead consisted of a reporter talking to Trump about her, while Hicks sat silently in the room, smiling. (GQ)

