Quantitative exhaustion smothers markets

2016-06-19

Is quantitative failure, in other words the diminishing power of central bank bond-buying to stimulate growth, a risk for the markets?

Investors certainly seem to think so. The closely watched Bank of America Merrill Lynch global fund manager survey for June cited quantitative failure as one of the main tail risks in the markets. 

A tail risk is not something an investor expects or thinks likely, but if it happens it is a significant move that can devastate portfolios as people are caught out on the wrong side of a trade.

Technically, tail risk is a higher than expected probability of an asset moving more than three standard deviations from the mean. Such a dramatic move would put a large spoke in the wheels of the bond market rally.

Quantitative failure might be difficult to define and would probably divide opinions as quantitative easing has arguably stimulated some growth, even if the bond-purchasing programmes in the eurozone and Japan are not working as well as central bankers would like. 

Indeed, quantitative failure is most likely in the eurozone and Japan, where a sizeable chunk of bonds are trading at negative yields. The problem is that the central banks in these regions, particularly the Bank of Japan, have bought so many bonds that the purchases are having a diminishing impact on bond yields and the market. 

It is a far cry from the early days of QE in the US and UK, when yields moved sharply lower in what some investors think sparked the equity bull run.

Steven Major, global head of fixed income research at HSBC, the bank, prefers not to use the term quantitative failure. Instead, he says there seems to be a case for quantitative exhaustion, as the toolkit of monetary policy looks close to depletion.

This quantitative exhaustion may lead to another risk: that central bankers will resort to helicopter money in the eurozone and Japan. 

HSBC defines helicopter money as government stimulus where funds are created by the central bank rather than through the issuance of sovereign debt, as in the case of QE. Governments may cut taxes, increase spending or investment in infrastructure, without an associated rise in government debt. 

Mr Major believes helicopter money would be the natural successor to other unconventional policies, such as zero interest rates, forward guidance, QE and negative interest rates.

Helicopter money is not a base case or an expected scenario and it is not obviously imminent, says Mr Major. But while nominal gross domestic product growth remains weak, it cannot be discounted. 

With deepening worries about growth in the stronger economies of the US and UK, the risk that more unconventional and dramatic action will have to be taken in the eurozone and Japan can only rise. 

The US Federal Reserve’s decision to hold rates at its June meeting and to cut back longer-term rate forecasts was blamed on slower than expected jobs growth and overseas hazards, such as a potential UK exit from the EU in the referendum vote on Thursday.

Buying of US government debt accelerates as rates forecast is cut

Some investors are forecasting that the US will enter recession sooner rather than later, possibly within the next two years. 

James Carrick, an economist at Legal & General Investment Management, says investors are in for a bumpy ride. LGIM’s credit framework suggests recession is plausible in 2018 in the US. 

Mr Carrick says corporate delinquencies in the US have started to jump as the Fed has begun raising interest rates. Banks are also reporting tightening credit conditions, which LGIM worries will become self-reinforcing. In the UK, some investors warn that Brexit would also bring about recession. 

So far, the bad news has been good for bonds. Markets have rallied sharply, with investors switching out of equities in response to weaker data while seeking havens from the uncertainty of the Brexit vote.

But quantitative failure or quantitative exhaustion in the eurozone and Japan might hurt bonds if it prompts helicopter money or some other kind of fiscal loosening that may be the only way to treat the ills of so-called secular stagnation that has choked growth around the globe. 

A tail risk might be unlikely, but in a world where unconventional and unusual policy has become the norm, these risks should be taken seriously.

David Oakley is the FT’s corporate affairs correspondent

