Square Mile in shock after Britain votes to leave EU

2016-06-24

After the storm clouds on Thursday, the City of London was bathed in bright sunlight at 6am on Friday, as its workers woke up to the news that Britain will leave the EU and began to arrive at their offices. 

“Look, the sun is out,” said one City worker, trying to look on the bright side. “A lot of people are scared of change, but I am not.”

But other reactions were more sombre. One foreign exchange trader, rushing to work near the Bank of England, said he thought the vote would tip the UK into recession.

“I’m worried, cable [sterling/dollar] is down by 10 per cent,” said Michael Chance. “We are going to be looking at just battening the hatches down.”

“I went to sleep last night thinking that everything was going in one direction, and I wake up this morning and everything’s changed,” said a fund manager. “There will continue to be a sharp reaction in markets, but we need to see what will be happening on Monday, not just this morning.”

Another City worker who did not wish to be identified said the Brexit vote was “the beginning of a new ‘f*** everybody else’ world”.

“That big deal with Generali, that’s gone now,” one businessman waiting for Starbucks in Walbrook to open, was overheard telling his companion. Another couple of workers, crossing the road near Cannon Street station, were heard swapping hashtags. “#funday,” said one. “#nofuture,” responded the other.

Twenty-year-old Henry Watts, on his way to the bank he works in, said he was in shock.

“This is not the country I thought it was. For young people like me, we’ve got a long hard haul ahead of us,” he said.

A Portuguese security guard, on his way to open up his offices, gave a sense of what some non-UK EU nationals must be feeling this morning. “I’m so sorry about it, so disappointed,” said Jorge.

Through plate glass windows early bird City workers huddled around computer monitors, watching the rolling news. Commuters heading into coffee shops talked animatedly about the result, with most sounding unhappy. “F****** Farage,” one said. “It’s unbearable.”

UK talks with the EU will take up to a decade and could enter “a legal and political no man’s land”

Reactions on the streets were not universally negative, however. Russell Chweidan, a banker, said he had voted for Brexit. He predicted “a hairy few days” in the markets but predicted: “I don’t think it will be a whole lot more than that”. 

The markets, he said, had got carried away on the prospect of a solid Remain win so “a sell-off today was going to happen anyway”.

In Canary Wharf, bankers were also reeling. Gareth, a director at a UK bank who voted Remain, said there was “panic and uncertainty” on his trading floor.

“We have two years after Article 50 is invoked [and] a lot can happen in that period,” he said. “It’s going to be a bit of a rollercoaster [and] I don’t think anything good will come of it.” 

Neil, a consultant to a UK bank, predicted that there would be “carnage” in markets. 

The vote for Britain to leave the EU will have grave consequences

“The one thing we don’t like is uncertainty. I think the City will adapt and survive but we’re in for a rocky ride before we settle down again.”

The feeling on the Square Mile and Canary Wharf was mirrored by the emerging reaction of the UK’s business community on Friday morning.

Malcolm Sweeting, senior partner at law firm Clifford Chance, said the result had “serious implications” for the City. 

Simon Walker, director-general of the Institute of Directors said it was not the result that the majority of the IoD’s members had wanted.

“The weeks and months ahead are going to be a nervy time for business leaders, so they need to know that the government is focused on maintaining stability,” he said. 

“[But] British businesses are resilient and, with their characteristic ingenuity, they will weather this storm.”

