Intu Properties extends winning streak with 3% climb

2016-06-21

Intu Properties was a gainer on Tuesday as the FTSE 100 extended its pre-referendum rally into a third day.

Intu, formerly known as Capital Shopping Centres, climbed 3.3 per cent to 308.3p as upgrades followed its deal to buy its joint venture partner out of the Merry Hill centre near Birmingham. Queensland Investment Corporation last week sold its 50 per cent stake to Intu for £410m, an 8.5 per cent discount to the latest valuation. 

Analysts saw the discount price as evidence that UK shopping centre valuations are sliding from their 2014 peak, and that sovereign wealth funds might be retrenching their UK property investments in response to oil price weakness. But Macquarie argued that Intu is getting a bargain if management can deliver site improvements to match its Trafford Centre and Lakeside malls.

With management confident of delivering like-for-like growth, Intu’s 21 per cent discount to net asset value looks too wide, said Macquarie. It repeated a 320p target on Intu shares.

Oil stocks underpinned the wider market as the FTSE 100 added 22.55 points or 0.4 per cent to 6,226.55. Royal Dutch Shell, up 0.9 per to £18.35, was the biggest points contributor.

Rio Tinto edged 0.4 per cent lower to £20.32 in spite of break-up speculation. Rio’s move to put $9bn of assets into a newly created energy and minerals segment “seems like a portfolio of unwanted assets that could be ready for a spin-off,” said Bernstein. 

Chemring dropped 17.5 per cent to 115.3p after posting weaker than expected interims and warning that full-year results would be “slightly below market expectations”. Management blamed operational problems in the UK and Australia, as well as the late start of an ammunition contract from a Middle Eastern customer.

Senior faded 12.8 per cent to 196.4p after warning of an earnings shortfall at its Flexonics industrial division, which makes engine parts and assemblies used in the energy industries.

ICAP added 3.8 per cent to 430.1p after Merrill Lynch added the interdealer broker to its “buy” list on valuation grounds. Retaining a 500p target price, Merrill argued that ICAP looks oversold given currencies other than sterling make up nine-tenths of its revenue, so it would not be significantly affected by a referendum Leave vote.

WH Smith added 0.7 per cent to £16.91 on a Stifel upgrade to “buy”. 

Stifel said in more than a decade in charge of the retailer, senior management has coped with the rise of Amazon and declining sales of CDs and DVDs, proving they can weather rougher storms than a potential Brexit. “In our opinion, WH Smith shares deserve to trade at a sector premium to reflect travel division growth and strong group free cash flow, the vast majority of which is returned to shareholders.”

