Merkel and Hollande must seize this golden chance

2016-06-24

The facts of political Europe have changed. Britain has made its choice and continental European leaders must do the same. While frustration with British policymakers is immense, the golden chance of Brexit is that Paris and Berlin have the chance to turn a crisis into an opportunity, and to do so without worrying about alienating London.

The leaders of the two largest EU countries should prepare a strong message when they meet Matteo Renzi, Italian prime minister, and European Council president Donald Tusk on Monday. Citizens and markets need a reason to believe the core of the EU will hold. Investors are testing the euro. If the EU shows helplessness now, the southern periphery will be hardest hit, again. This job cannot be handled by the European Central Bank alone.

This is not a call to press on blindly with deepening integration. Leaders should offer proposals to complete monetary union to make it more resilient, as well as more convincing policies to fight unemployment, inequality, and sinking competitiveness through investment in infrastructure, innovation, and education.

Angela Merkel, German chancellor, French president François Hollande, and other EU leaders need to show that they hear the message. Although much in the UK vote was not about the EU, things have to change: Brussels has stepped back on red-tape but can do more. Berlin and Paris should propose institutional reforms enhancing democratic legitimacy. A eurozone finance minister and eurozone parliamentary committee could, for example, be implemented without treaty revision.

The third issue is security. The Brexit camp won with the message of regaining control over immigration. Longing for control over one’s own fate is not particularly British. It is the root of far-right and far-left populism across the EU. Leaders should now devise an initiative on border control, asylum policy, and intelligence co-operation.

So-called exit clause establishes the balance of power for divorce talks

Meanwhile EU leaders should not push to trigger Article 50 quickly as there will be a new prime minister and Westminster will have to endorse the results of the referendum. 

If London starts divorce negotiations, the EU should take a hard line, not least to demonstrate to anti-Europeans that this is no example to follow. This means, first of all, separating exit negotiations, which should be restricted to two years, from a future relationship. 

Once a deal is agreed and passed by the Council of Ministers, the European Parliament and Westminster will have to approve it. For Britain, this parliamentary ratification is a chance to change tack. Public opinion about Brexit may change.

Continental Europe, meanwhile, can identify areas for co-operation with independent London, including the fight against terrorism. Germany would be keen to keep Britain close — perhaps Norway-style. But this is a sad substitute for the alliance with London in the EU. 

The writer is director of the Europe programme at the German Marshall Fund 

