Tensions rise on eve of Britain’s EU vote

2016-06-22

Queues formed outside foreign-exchange dealerships and banks conducted a final round of wargames to stress-test systems amid mounting signs of tension in London’s financial centre as Britons prepared to go to vote on whether to exit the EU.

Some senior financiers saw worrying echoes of the 2008 financial crisis. Lord Mervyn Davies, the former Standard Chartered chairman and Labour minister, said: “Everyone’s fearing a 2008 freeze of the wholesale markets. If that happens [the Bank of England] is going to have to step in as a buyer of all assets.”

In scenes reminiscent of the queues that formed outside branches of Northern Rock and led to its collapse in 2007, City of London workers rushed to switch sterling into euros and dollars. “I’m protecting my money,” said Summaya, a 31-year-old employee of a retail bank. “I will stick it under the mattress.”

Investment bankers also expressed concern. “Wholesale markets are not in great shape and that’s without Brexit,” a senior banker said. “There’s a lack of liquidity when you’re trying to buy something …not just when you’re desperate to sell …That has meant the market can freeze just because nobody can get anything done.”

As months of intense campaigning drew to a close in a vote critical to both the UK’s place in the world and the EU itself, Britain’s four living prime ministers— David Cameron, Gordon Brown, Tony Blair and John Major — will on Thursday make a last-ditch plea to the country to vote Remain.

Mr Cameron’s team remain “quietly confident” of victory on the back of a hoped for a late swing back to the “status quo”, but aides admit the contest could be very tight. Financial markets and betting odds continued to predict Britons voting to remain in the EU; Ladbrokes odds imply a 74 per cent chance of a Remain vote.

However, Remain’s share increased in three of the four main polls released on Wednesday. Most dramatically, a ComRes phone poll for ITV showed Remain on 54 per cent and Leave on 46 per cent, after adjusting for undecided voters; ComRes’s previous poll had shown just a 2 per cent gap. YouGov gave Remain a 51/49 point advantage. Two opinion polls during the day on Wednesday gave Leave maintaining a slight lead: TNS gave Leave a 43-41 per cent advantage and Opinium 45-44. 

The Financial Times’ poll of polls now has Remain on 47 and Leave on 45. 

On the back of these latest numbers, sterling rallied by 0.8 per cent against the dollar to $1.482 at the start of Thursday’s trading session.

To prepare for a possible Brexit, banks have stepped up wargames in recent days, modelling for extreme pressure on their cash reserves. With the encouragement of regulators, some lenders have even run modelling for the imposition of capital controls, according to people briefed on the exercise.

I’m protecting my money. I will stick it under the mattress

Banks said regulators had demanded a stress test that modelled for a 20 per cent fall in sterling. Traders said the volume of derivatives being used as protection against steep declines in currency and equities had not been seen since the peak of the eurozone crisis in 2011.

The cost of hedging against big moves in the pound — as measured by the one-week sterling volatility — rose to 43.86 on Wednesday afternoon London time.

Despite the heightened sense of alert, bank treasurers said they were confident their balance sheets were robust, given that capital and liquidity buffers were many times higher than in the last financial crisis.

Now that the people are to have their say, the first duty of this newspaper is to urge its British readers — and the wider public — to go out and vote

There were also signs some European leaders would be accommodating to the UK if it chose to leave. While Jean-Claude Juncker, the European Commission president, vowed there would be no further renegotiation with Brussels after a Leave vote, the head of Germany’s primary employers’ group said it would be “very, very foolish” to erect trade barriers with a Britain outside the EU.

Both in 2008 and in the eurozone crisis in 2011, banks’ reliance on short-term funding proved fatal, when a mass withdrawal of US money market funds triggered panic and a severe shortage of loan finance. The funds are far smaller suppliers of bank finance today and have yet to be spooked by the referendum, bankers said.

Nonetheless banks are braced for extreme volatility on Friday. “You make sure that you don’t have any major rollovers coming up,” said one senior banker at a foreign-headquartered investment bank. “You make sure that you don’t have any currency exposures in your balance sheet you’re not very comfortable with [and] that you have the capacity in electronic trading systems you will need.”

Some banks have warned clients they may be unable to fulfil orders due to insufficient market liquidity — a key concern for regulators.

Large investment banks and brokers have been quizzed in the past fortnight by the Financial Conduct Authority, Britain’s main financial regulator, about how they are planning for any increased market volatility and currency fluctuations in the vote’s aftermath, and how it might affect their capital and liquidity buffers.

The FCA declined to comment.

The regulator is particularly keen to avoid a repetition of early 2015 when the Swiss National Bank unexpectedly scrapped a cap on its currency against the euro which led to heavy losses among currency brokers and trading firms that allow clients to magnify their positions with leveraged loans. The large, surprise swing in the Swiss franc left clients who lost money unable to pay up to meet so-called margin calls and the brokers suffered losses.

Fears of fallout from the EU referendum have encouraged brokers such as IG Group, CMC Markets and PhillipCapital UK to raise margins in the weeks leading up to it.

The FCA’s sister regulator at the Bank of England, the Prudential Regulation Authority, has already told high-street lenders to stockpile extra cash across their branches and make sure all their ATMs are working should a Brexit vote prompt large amounts of retail customers to begin withdrawing their savings.

Additional reporting by Martin Arnold, Henry Mance and George Parker

————————-

UK’s EU referendum: full coverage and analysis

View the FT’s comprehensive guide to the vote on whether Britain should stay in Europe, with all the latest news, analysis and commentary from both sides of the debate. See more 

————————-

