Emerging markets dive on Brexit shock

2016-06-24

There is nowhere to hide for emerging markets investors on Friday.

While the UK’s shock vote to leave the EU has triggered a massive rally in safe haven assets, the flipside has been a equally ferocious sell-off in risk assets – and EMs have not been spared.

The steepest falls have been concentrated in EMs with the closest ties with the UK, with the Polish zloty suffering its worst day of trading in nearly five years after tumbling 5 per cent against the greenback. The country’s benchmark stock index shed 6.5 per cent of its value, its biggest one day drop since February 2009.

Other currencies from eastern and central European countries also suffered sustained selling, with the Hungarian forint and the Romanian leu both down more than 3 per cent.

As Simon Quijano-Evans, chief EM strategist at Commerzbank, noted:

As we all know by now, all the CEE countries who joined the EU since 2004 have the most to lose from all of this mess. PLN, HUF, RON have all reacted correspondingly and it is no coincidence that the list of those in the EU calling for a referendum in their countries are at the top of the list of net payers into the EU budget (chart 1 below and attached). The picture couldn’t be clearer as to who has the most to “win” from an exit and who has the most to “lose”.

Meanwhile concerns that markets’ risk off sentiment could prompt a sharp reversal in capital flows have also made EMs with large current account deficits and foreign currency debts prime selling targets.

The South African rand is down by 4.4 per cent against the dollar while the Turkish lira fell 2.6 per cent and the Brazilian real dropped nearly 2 per cent.

Elsewhere, the Mexican peso – which already has the dubious distinction of being the second worst-performing major EM currency this year – briefly to a new record low against the dollar. As the world’s most liquid EM currency, with $135bn changing hands daily and trading 24 hours a day, the peso is often sold off during periods of market turmoil as investors use it as a hedge against their more illiquid positions.

Enrique Covarrubias, head of strategy, fixed income and economics at Actinver in Mexico, said ahead of the UK referendum this week that Brexit would mean an exchange rate of “at least 20” pesos to the dollar – despite Mexico’s sound economic fundamentals and modest growth.

Other analysts reckon that a sharp fall in the peso could prompt the Mexican central bank to make good on its warnings to support the currency, either through discretionary intervention or a direct rate hike.

The upshot for EM investors is that while the fallout from the Brexit vote is likely weigh on EM assets in the coming days, Neil Shearing, chief emerging markets economist at Capital Economics, reckons the direct economic impact on the emerging world is likely to be smaller than many fear.

…despite the response in financial markets the economic impact on EMs should be surprisingly small. As we’ve noted before, the direct economic ties between most EMs and the UK are relatively limited. For example, we estimate that even if the UK economy were to suffer a severe recession in the wake of the vote with imports falling by 10%, the likely drop in EM exports to the UK would be equivalent to just 0.1% of aggregate EM GDP.

