Yellen warns of ‘considerable uncertainty’

2016-06-21

Federal Reserve chair Janet Yellen said she will tread carefully as she gauges when to lift short-term interest rates again as the central bank assesses whether the economic recovery remains on track and the jobs market is still improving.

In a cautious statement, Ms Yellen told a Senate Committee that she saw “considerable uncertainty” about the US economic outlook, singling out weaker hiring numbers and soft investment as evidence of some of the risks that remain on the horizon.

In the short term the UK’s referendum on its membership of the EU could have “significant economic repercussions”, the Fed chair added, while the economy faces longer-term doubts over the likely pace of productivity growth.

Ms Yellen’s words will further damp expectations of a rate rise next month following the Fed’s December increase as policymakers weigh a mixed set of economic indicators. Slower jobs growth in May and overseas hazards such as a possible UK exit from the EU prompted the Fed last week to hold policy unchanged as it trimmed back its longer-term interest-rate forecasts.

“Proceeding cautiously in raising the federal funds rate will allow us to keep the monetary support to economic growth in place while we assess whether growth is returning to a moderate pace, whether the labour market will strengthen further, and whether inflation will continue to make progress toward our 2 per cent objective,” Ms Yellen said in prepared testimony to the Senate Banking Committee.

She added: “The pace of improvement in the labour market appears to have slowed more recently, suggesting that our cautious approach to adjusting monetary policy remains appropriate.”

Asked about the impact of the referendum by Richard Shelby, the Republican chair of the Banking Committee, Ms Yellen told the hearing that a vote to exit by the UK could usher in a “period of uncertainty” that leads to volatility in financial markets. 

This could negatively affect financial conditions and the US economic outlook, although this outcome was by no means certain and was something the Fed would be “carefully monitoring”, she added.

Ms Yellen said that most analysis suggested the economic consequences for the UK of a Brexit vote would be negative, and that it could usher in a period of uncertainty not only for the UK but for European economic integration more broadly.

The upshot for financial markets could be a flight to safer assets that could push up the dollar and other so-called haven currencies, she explained. Asked whether Brexit could send the US economy into recession, Ms Yellen said “I don’t think that is the most likely case”, but that the ensuing events would have to be watched carefully. 

The Fed has been sending mixed signals this year as to when it might follow up the landmark quarter-point rate increase it pushed through in December. Market turmoil earlier this year has subsided, but it has been followed by a slowdown in jobs growth. At the same time, consumer spending has picked up as have broader growth indicators for the second quarter.

Ms Yellen said she was optimistic about US prospects overall, saying she expected to see further improvements in the jobs market and economy over the next few years. She said she believed that the slowdown in jobs growth in May, when just 38,000 jobs were created, down from 123,000 the previous month, would likely prove to be transitory. In addition, there was evidence of a “noticeable step-up” in GDP growth in the second quarter.

However given persistent uncertainties about the economy, the Fed chair suggested the central bank should maintain a supportive stance to policy for the time being.

“The latest readings on the labour market and the weak pace of investment illustrate one downside risk — that domestic demand might falter,” said Ms Yellen.

“Although I am optimistic about the longer-term prospects for the US economy, we cannot rule out the possibility expressed by some prominent economists that the slow productivity growth seen in recent years will continue in the future.”

The Fed also sees vulnerabilities in overseas economies, with China in particular facing heavy challenges overhauling its growth model. Sluggish global growth means investors can suddenly alter their appetite for risk, leading to sharp swings in markets.

One possible trigger was Thursday’s referendum in the UK, Ms Yellen added. “A UK vote to exit the European Union could have significant economic repercussions.”

In a separate report to Congress, the Fed on Tuesday said that while financial markets had stabilised following volatility earlier this year, the potential remains for “spillovers” to the US economy from shocks including the UK referendum.

It described financial vulnerabilities in the US as being “moderate”, but it added: “a number of possible external shocks, including if the United Kingdom chooses to leave the European Union in a pending referendum, could pose risks to financial stability.”

The report also highlighted the downward drift of some measures of expected inflation — a factor that it has been scrutinising as it seeks to guard the credibility of its 2 per cent inflation target. According to the University of Michigan survey of consumers, five to 10-year inflation expectations are at a record low, the report noted, adding that this could reverse if it was driven by falling oil prices.

Market-based measures of inflation compensation had also dropped to low levels, and this could be driven by a number of factors, but “one cannot rule out a decline in inflation expectations among market participants since last summer,” the Fed report said.

