Green light for Asian interest rates

2016-06-21

Brexit is the all-consuming topic in financial markets this week and with it comes volatility and, perhaps, calamity, which equates to a tightening in financial conditions. For emerging Asia, however, the stronger, longer-term pull may be in the opposite direction: not only did the US Federal Reserve keep its interest rates on hold last week; it was so cautious that most investors no longer expect a rate rise until December, if then.

For Asian monetary policymakers, that is a green light to add stimulus to their own economies and to make sure their currencies do not suffer an unwelcome appreciation against a weaker (or, at least, less strong) dollar.

Bank Indonesia has already done so, referencing the Fed’s decision as “an opportunity” to cut interest rates last Thursday. The Philippine central bank governor, Amando Tetangco, has also hinted that his board may adjust policy settings at its June 23 meeting after the Fed’s “more dovish stance”. 

This will come as welcome relief. Until the poor US May payrolls were released in early June, Asian central bankers were gearing up for a US summer rate hike, followed by another during the autumn. That made them cautious about their capacity to reduce rates at home since it could invite currency volatility and capital outflows. Now, many believe the Fed may stay on hold for a prolonged period, providing them with greater flexibility to prop up domestic growth. 

As a result, Medley Global Advisors, a macro research service owned by the FT, sees further rate cuts on the horizon for the Bank of Korea and Bank Indonesia, even though both have already delivered surprise rate cuts this month. Seoul announced its consideration of a supplementary budget on Friday, adding pressure on the BOK to deliver another “complementary” cut as soon as August. 

Given the finance ministry’s newest prediction that tax revenue will exceed projections by up to 10tn won ($8.6bn) this year, getting a modest extra spending package through parliament should be possible; especially now that the ruling Saenuri Party has regained a plurality in the National Assembly, following rising approval ratings and opposition scandals.

Bank Indonesia may stick to the sidelines in July, a holiday month. But BI is unhappy that credit growth continued to slow in April, rising 8 per cent year on year versus March’s 8.7 per cent, and lower than its target of 10-12 per cent for 2016. It introduced a number of macroprudential measures on Thursday, including a reduction of loan-to-value limits, which will take effect in August. 

However, if credit growth stays in the single digits, the board will consider further rate cuts, with rising confidence that the rupiah can remain in the 13,000/$ range against a becalmed greenback.

Taiwan’s Central Bank of China is poised to cut the benchmark discount rate again at its quarterly meeting on June 30, as exports, which make up more than 60 per cent of GDP, remain sluggish. May export orders are expected to show a contraction for the 14th straight month and Taipei slashed its economic growth forecasts last month as a result. 

Given that foreign trade is unlikely to rebound in the near term, and with Fed tightening delayed, the CBC may extend the easing cycle into next year. That would also support the government’s economic reform efforts and help push back against FX appreciation pressure. 

The Bank of Thailand will probably stay on hold this Wednesday, as better Q1 GDP and faster inflation growth give it reasons to pause this month. But policymakers in Bangkok have a longstanding aversion to baht appreciation, which eats into exporters’ earnings, reduces competitiveness, and weighs on tourism — the only bright spot in the economy at the moment. 

If the baht, up 2 per cent against the dollar year-to-date, surges as a result of Fed inaction, the bank may respond with aggressive easing, as it did last year with consecutive rate cuts. 

Bank Negara Malaysia also welcomes the additional policy space, but does not see a need to follow the others in cutting interest rates at this time. Growth for 2016 is expected to hit the higher end of its 4-4.5 per cent forecast and the rebound in energy prices will mean better dividends and corporate tax revenue for the 2017 fiscal budget. 

Senior BNM officials would rather preserve their monetary bullets for now, but note that a rate reduction would be on the cards should new downside risks materialise — and that they are keeping close tabs on China and the US. The more dovish Fed may raise anxiety levels a bit about the strength of the US recovery, but overall they see the US economy muddling through this year.

Dan Bogler is a commissioning editor at Medley Global Advisors

Follow us on Twitter @em_sqrd

