Brussels briefing: the Brexit war on experts

2016-06-16

One of the most striking quotes ahead of Britain’s referendum was Michael Gove’s claim that “people in this country have had enough of experts”. As this polling data shows, the Brexit backing justice secretary was on to something, at least when it comes to Leave supporters.

The YouGov pollsters gauged public trust in the views of “experts” and politicians when they speak about the EU referendum. It is no surprise that both Leave and Remain supporters are wary of politicians – both at home and abroad – albeit by different margins.

When it comes to experts, though, there is an chasm. Remain supporters tend to believe academics, economists and people from the Bank of England. Leave backers mistrust them all, especially if they come from Threadneedle Street (net trust minus 45 per cent). You can add business leaders to that list too (plus 28 per cent trust among Remainers, and minus 28 for Leavers).

There is a paradox to this. As the FT’s Chris Giles notes today, there has rarely been such “expert” consensus on an issue. While economists argue over how harmful Brexit would be, there is near unity that it would be harmful to the economy. The dismal science is in speaking in concert for once and the public just don’t seem to be listening. As Tobias Buck found in a report from revolutionary Bracknell, middle England is in an iconoclastic mood. 

Should Brexiters prevail, Giles argues it will have lasting impact. The Leave side delight in being the “enemy of good economics” and may continue to do so if they seize power. There would be a chilling effect on economists speaking their minds. And if the Brexiters are actually proven right – if leaving the EU turns out to be beneficial – the profession “will enter a crisis that will dwarf its inability to see the global financial crisis coming”.

For now, the warnings keep coming. Janet Yellen, chair of the Federal Reserve, joined the throng by citing Brexit doubts as a factor in the decision to hold US interest rates. On Friday the International Monetary Fund will publish its (probably gory) assessment of the costs of Brexit. And on Thursday night, George Osborne will repeat that long list of economic warnings during his Mansion House speech, ever hopeful the argument will eventually cut through. Seven days to go.

The FT backs Remain: This is no time to revert to Little England 

The Spectator makes the case for Leave, while the New Statesman supports the EU

David Cameron is today making the first visit of a sitting prime minister to Gibraltar since 1968. The Spanish are not happy at all and have “reiterated their opposition” to such trips.

There is a delicious irony to this. While everyone in Europe is tiptoeing around the Brits or Spanish as they prepare to vote, we’re about to see the referendum campaign (Britain) collide with the election campaign (Spain).

In this instance, it may well be in the interests of both Cameron and Mariano Rajoy to stoke some controversy and win some kudos with nationalists. After Wednesday’s Farage vs Geldof antics on the Thames, we can only pray there are no boats involved.

Another messy day for Britain’s ruling party.

Chancellor George Osborne’s claim that Brexit would force him to raise taxes or spending by £30bn prompted a furious response from Tory Leave supporters on the backbenches. The letter from 65 MPs promising to block any emergency “Brexit budget” is a sign of trouble ahead in the Commons, whatever the result of the vote may be. Mr Osborne’s leadership hopes are badly damaged; some MPs are saying he may be out of a job even if Remain win. Two Tory party leaders and two former chancellors today accuse Mr Osborne of “ludicrous scaremongering”.

One Remain supporter whose leadership hopes are still strong is Theresa May, the justice secretary. She made a rare intervention in the debate on Wednesday, telling the BBC that while she supported EU membership, some more curbs on free movement were needed. Ms May denied she had “been quiet” during the campaign – with this intervention on immigration, Downing Street may wish she were more so.

Juncker’s troubles Politico report on doubts over the effectiveness of Jean-Claude Juncker, running through perceived political missteps and personal health issues of the European Commission president. Lots of data crunching on his diary.

Spanish election watch The door to door ground campaign of Podemos has outflanked other Spanish parties say El Pais. There is movement on the idea of a minority government. And El Mundo reports that Spain’s public sector payroll isnow back to pre-crisis levels.

Nato on migration The defensive alliance is to take a bigger role in handling the refugee crisis. Nato ships could become involved on the central Mediterranean route, between Libya and Italy. In the Aegean, however, Turkey seems intent to restrict its room to roam.

More French strikes Unions are preparing for more protests against French labour reforms, including on June 23. Le Figaro looks at whether the President Francois Hollande has the right to enforce a ban.

To receive our Brussels briefing every morning in your email in-box, sign up here.

