ECB ready to ‘cushion’ markets with liquidity after Brexit – Nowotny

2016-06-16

With just seven days before Britain heads to the polls, the world’s central bankers are slowly revealing more details about their contingency planning for financial markets after a potential ‘Brexit’ vote.

Ewald Nowotny, Austria’s central bank chief and European Central Bank board member, is the latest to chime in saying the ECB and Bank of England would make use of existing liquidity tools which would be revived in the aftermath of a leave vote. writes Mehreen Khan.

In the most detailed comments yet from an ECB policymaker, Mr Nowotny said both central banks had enough firepower to ensure sufficient liquidity to prevent banking panics from spreading across Europe.

“A central bank has the duty to prepare for every alternative”, he said in Vienna on Thursday. “There could be disturbances on the market in the short term”.

Speaking of the “existing agreements for mutual liquidity aid”, Mr Nowotny referred to foreign exchange swap lines which have been in place between both central banks and the Federal Reserve since the financial crisis. 

“If needed, it’s secured that neither English nor European banks will have liquidity shortages”, he said.

In an attempt to soothe market fears ahead of the vote, the Bank of England provided its first special liquidity operation window to commercial banks on Tuesday – a measure which sees it flood lenders with a wall of money to prevent scares over a bank run. It will do so again on June 21.

Mr Nowotny added that an EU exit would have consequences for London’s position as the world’s financial hub.

“It would mean that a big European financial marketplace would no longer be within the European Union” and “certain relocation to other financial marketplaces within the European Union can be expected”, he said.

Earlier today, Bank of Japan chief Haruhiko Kuroda said the central bank was in “close communication” with the Bank of England about potential stabilisation measures for financial markets after June 23.

