S Korea to ease capital control measures

2016-06-16

South Korea is overhauling its capital controls, making it easier to tap overseas markets in a partial reversal of its battle against hot money inflows since the global financial crisis.

The move reflects fears that the banking system would struggle were money to suddenly flow out as US interest rates rise. The action, announced jointly by the finance ministry and regulators, came hours after Federal Reserve chair Janet Yellen kept alive the prospect of another US rate rise in the coming months. 

“We’ve seen a weakening in capital inflows since the second half of last year due to monetary policy tightening in the US,” said a joint statement on Thursday. “We see the possibility of capital outflows increasing on political and economic risks like the Brexit referendum, the US presidential election and rate hikes there.”

Policymakers have faced growing calls for modifying the rules on banks’ exposure to currency derivatives to provide local banks with a buffer against capital outflows in case of external shocks. 

Starting July, domestic banks will be allowed to hold foreign exchange derivatives positions up to a maximum 40 per cent of their capital from the current 30 per cent level. The limit for foreign bank subsidiaries will be raised from 150 per cent to 200 per cent. In effect, the higher cap allows banks to hold more dollars via forward contracts — adding to liquidity if demand for the US currency suddenly spiked.

“The reality is that Korea tends to see demand for dollars increase pretty sharply in times of stress,” said Mitul Kotecha, head of Asia currency and rates strategy at Barclays. “This is being done ahead of potential risks in the coming weeks and months and in that sense, it’s a good move.”

Central banks in the region have been working to increase liquidity against the risks of shocks or stresses — particularly following the outflows of 2013 during the so-called “taper tantrum” when investors feared sharply tighter US monetary policy.

Korea also moved to improve domestic liquidity, mandating that from next year, Korean banks will have hold 60 per cent of their foreign currency exposure in high-quality assets that can be easily converted into cash within 30 days. 

Waning expectations of a US rate rise allows BoK to move earlier to support sluggish economy

They will be required to gradually raise the ratio up to 80 per cent by 2019, in line with standards under global Basel III regulations aimed at bolstering bank resilience to liquidity shocks. 

The move is the first change in Korean currency rules since the cap on forward contracts was last tightened in 2013. It was first introduced in 2010 in an effort to limit hot money inflows as Korea battled to limit export-sapping currency strength. 

Like many other Asian nations, Korea has been wary of sharp changes in capital flows since the 1997-98 Asian financial crisis, which pushed the country to the brink of national insolvency. 

The Korean won’s movement has become more volatile recently on changing expectations of the Fed move, gaining 1.6 per cent against the dollar this month after weakening about 4 per cent in the previous two months. 

Earlier this month, the Bank of Korea cut its benchmark interest rate to a record low of 1.25 per cent, increasing concerns of a potential capital flight, as the Fed is expected to gradually raise rates this year although it kept them unchanged this week. 

Experts said the changed rules were unlikely to have a big impact on Korea’s foreign currency market. 

“Unless the Fed hikes rates rapidly, we are not likely to see massive fund outflows from emerging markets,” said Oh Suk-tae, economist at Société Générale. “This seems more of a pre-emptive measure as the Fed will likely find it hard to raise rates sharply this year, given the fragile state of the US economy and global markets.” 

