Cameron appeals to British pride in Gibraltar ahead of EU vote

2016-06-16

David Cameron is flying into Gibraltar on Thursday to speak at a mass rally in support of British membership of the EU, in a last-minute attempt to wrest the patriotic mantle from the Leave campaign and reverse the recent slide in the polls for the Remain camp.

It will be the first visit by a British prime minister to the tiny overseas territory since 1968, and comes just a week ahead of the UK’s historic referendum on EU membership. 

Mr Cameron’s arrival was criticised by the Spanish government, which claims Gibraltar as part of its own territory and has long been opposed to any overt political manifestations of British sovereignty.

The decision to hold a rally in Gibraltar — a slice of land that evokes strong patriotic fervour both in Spain and in Britain — marks a notable shift in strategy by Mr Cameron and the Remain camp. 

Until now, advocates of EU membership have sought to build their case mainly around economic arguments, warning that Brexit would plunge the country into deep uncertainty and inflict sharp damage on the economy.

According to recent polls, however, those claims have not prevented a late surge in favour of Leave, which is seen as slightly ahead. Prominent Brexit advocates have pursued a more emotional campaign, with a strong emphasis on migration and the notion that Brexit would allow Britain to “take back” control of the country.

Gibraltar offers Mr Cameron the opportunity to build a more emotional case in favour of Remain — not least by making use of the striking visual backdrop chosen for his address. 

The British prime minister is due to speak in front of thousands of flag-waving Gibraltarians on Grand Casemates Square, a site with important military connotations that is ringed by former barracks and a British-built fortified gun emplacement. It also boasts a replica of an 18th century Koehler gun carriage that was used to defend Gibraltar against Spanish attacks.

“Until now the Leave camp has been able to have the patriotic theme all to itself. But Gibraltar allows the prime minister to make a very concrete case that the patriotic thing to do is support Remain. Besides, where in the UK can you hold a Remain rally with 20,000 people,” a person close to the Gibraltar government said.

A Remain campaign aide said the prime minister was “going to roll up his sleeves and make a compelling case” for Britain to remain in the EU.

His visit to Gibraltar did not mark a shift in strategy, he insisted.

Mr Cameron would use “an element of patriotism” but “we are not going onto [the Leave camp’s] battleground,” he said. “We will set our own pace and our own agenda.”

The vast majority of Gibraltar citizens support British membership of the EU, not least because they regard the bloc as a bulwark against Spanish attempts to relaunch its sovereign claim. In practical terms, too, the EU has been helpful to the territory, most recently when it brokered a deal with Madrid to improve the flow of traffic across the Spanish border, the only entry point to Gibraltar on land.

How any break-up is carried out will have a decisive impact on Britain for generations

“Gibraltar’s best interests are served by remaining in the EU. That is the view of the government and there is widespread support for that in Gibraltar,” Fabian Picardo, the chief minister of Gibraltar, told the FT in April.

A poll released around the same time by the Gibraltar Chronicle found that 88 per cent of the local population were in favour of British membership of the EU.

The Spanish government issued a thinly worded statement on Wednesday acknowledging Mr Cameron’s trip. “The prime minister’s office reiterated Spain’s well-known position against such visits,” it added.

