UK government bond yields set fresh record low

2016-06-24

Global government bonds set fresh records on Friday as the UK’s decision to end EU-membership fuelled a rush for safety in financial markets. 

Some traders are now betting on fresh stimulus from central banks including the Bank of England, the European Central Bank and Bank of Japan that will further boost bonds.

John Wraith, head of UK rates strategy at UBS, said investors had been forced to confront a new reality. “This has totally wrongfooted everyone,” he added of the historic referendum.

Benchmark 10-year UK gilt yields fell to a new low of 1.01 per cent in early trading on Friday morning — down 36 basis points — as investors sold out of equities and sterling hit a 30-year low against the US dollar.

The drop mirrored earlier moves in US 10-year Treasuries, which dipped to a four-year low of 1.40 per cent, and German Bunds, which hit a new low of minus 0.17 per cent. 

In Switzerland, almost the entire market for Swiss government debt traded below zero, with 30-year debt offering an annual yield of minus 0.04 per cent. Only one Swiss bond — a 2064 maturity — now pays a positive yield. 

“People tend to think of large government bond markets as low-risk and boring,” said Michael Riddell, fund manager at Allianz Global Investors. “But it was clear early on that today would be different.”

In the UK, investor focus has quickly shifted to the Bank of England’s expected policy response to a vote that economists have said leaves the country more vulnerable to recession. Analysts at Pimco predict the BoE’s benchmark rate will be cut to zero by the end of the year as policymakers seek to support the economy. 

BoE governor Mark Carney said the bank would not “hesitate to take any additional measures required.”

The question of how investors would treat UK government bonds in the event of a Leave vote had been hotly contested in the run-up to the referendum, with some expecting yields to fall amid a worldwide rush into “safe” government bonds. Others predicted yields would rise as international investors sold out of their UK assets, including an analysis by the UK Treasury that predicted a 40 basis point rise in gilt yields in the event of Brexit.

Earlier this month, the yield on 10-year British government bonds dropped to a record low of 1.07 per cent as the Leave campaign gathered momentum.

However, in the day running up to the vote, demand for UK debt dwindled as markets bet that the Remain camp would win the day — sending rates on 10-year gilts to 1.37 per cent.

In Europe, James Clunie, fund manager at Jupiter, said the UK’s referendum was likely to trigger a chain reaction across the region that could drag on the credit profiles of the eurozone’s weakest economies, pushing up borrowing rates. 

As German bond rates fell to a new low on Friday morning, the yield on Italian 10-year bonds jumped to a seven-month high of 1.81 per cent, while Portuguese rates rose 60 basis points to a four-month high.

