Markets cautiously positive ahead of Brexit vote

2016-06-22

Equity benchmarks are firmer while the pound is strengthening and gold softer as investors adopt a cautiously positive tone a day out from the UK’s referendum on EU membership.

The backdrop of the Brexit debate means investors are less focused on Federal Reserve chair Janet Yellen’s semi-annual testimony to US congress yesterday, an event that is typically keenly watched, writes Jamie Chisholm.

After a mostly positive Asian session, the pan-European Stoxx 600 equity index is gaining 0.4 per cent as index futures suggest the S&P 500 will add just 3 points to 2,092.

London’s FTSE 100 is up 0.5 per cent, the British pound is adding 0.3 per cent at $1.4687 and benchmark 10-year gilt yields are easing 1 basis point to 1.28 per cent ahead of Thursday’s EU membership referendum.

Stocks and sterling have held much of their strong rallies from the start of the week which came on the back of polls that suggested the Leave campaign was losing momentum.

Analysts say the market’s current tentatively bullish mood reflects investors’ belief that the UK will decide to remain in the EU, reducing the risk of a political and economic rupture across the continent.

“The odds of a Leave victory implied by betting market odds are much more modest than the polls imply at circa 25 per cent,” note analysts at RBC Capital Markets.

The euro is up 0.3 per cent to $1.1269 contributing to a 0.1 per cent dip to 93.94 for the dollar index.

The softer buck comes after Ms Yellen reiterated her cautious stance on the outlook for US monetary policy but kept the door open to raising rates later this year.

In testimony before congress, the Fed chair said she saw “considerable uncertainty” about the US economic outlook in the wake of May’s weak non-farm payrolls report.

“While Yellen set a high bar for a rate hike in July, she kept the door open for rate hikes in the coming months, citing a ‘noticeable step-up’ in [second-quarter] GDP on a pick-up in consumer spending in recent months. Her optimism on the US economy was underscored by her belief that Brexit may not necessarily lead to a US recession,” said analysts at DBS.

However, futures markets are placing just a 49 per cent probability of a 25 basis point rate rise at December’s Fed meeting, helping to suppress government bond yields.

The US Treasury 10-year yield is a fraction of a basis point lower at 1.70 per cent, while equivalent maturity German Bunds are just 0.07 per cent, though up 2bp on the day.

Gold, which usually gains support from easing US borrowing costs, is following up Tuesday’s $22 retreat with another $3 loss to $1,265 an ounce as some “Brexit” premium is shaved off the price.

The softer greenback is helping oil prices gain ground. Brent crude, the international benchmark, is up 0.7 per cent at $50.99 a barrel and West Texas Intermediate, the US marker, is gaining 1 per cent at $50.34.

Earlier in Asia, Tokyo’s Nikkei 225 fell 0.6 per cent as the exporter-sensitive market continued to be rattled by the yen’s recent gains. The Japanese currency is 0.2 per cent firmer versus the dollar at ¥104.52, having at one point on Tuesday hit ¥103.57, its strongest since August 2014 amid “haven” inflows.

Other bourses in the region were more upbeat, following the positive overnight lead from Europe and Wall Street. South Korea’s Kospi rose 0.5 per cent while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng was up 0.8 per cent and on the mainland, China’s Shanghai Composite added 0.7 per cent.

