Brussels briefing: Princes and populists

2016-06-20

Europe’s four most powerful men are in peril, fighting for their political lives in some choppy and unusual electoral waters. Whether this week in the case of Britain’s David Cameron or Spain’s Mariano Rajoy, or in the coming months with regard to Matteo Renzi and Francois Hollande, each one is nearing a career-defining reckoning with voters. The four cover opposite ends of the mainstream political spectrum, but share a common fear: being undone by primal anti-establishment forces. Such is the lot of Europe’s political princes.

David Cameron’s verdict There is a touch more optimism in Downing Street on the EU referendum. After a tumultuous week, poll momentum has swung back to Remain (as well as defections). Mr Cameron also delivered a solid TV performance on Sunday night, channelling his inner Winston according to the FT’s Henry Mance. Note the emphasis on this referendum being a no-turning-back decision on the EU – but not on Mr Cameron. His approval ratings have plummeted but he insists this vote is not a verdict on him. It appears he may try, against the odds, to hold on to power after a Brexit win. Given what it would do to his legacy, what does he have to lose?

Matteo Renzi’s star falls Once the golden-child of this political quartet, the restless Italian Socialist is facing a ballot-box revolt. The Five Star movement routed Mr Renzi in Rome’s municipal elections last night, making Virginia Raggi the eternal city’s first female mayor. In a big upset Turin was lost as well to a 31-year old Five Star insurgent, Chiara Appendino. Mr Renzi’s Democratic party did manage to draw the line there, hanging on to Milan and Bolgna, where it was facing a more traditional run-off with centre-right opponents. All eyes are now on the October referendum on constitutional reform that Mr Renzi said he would win or quit. His enemies are circling.

Francois Hollande’s primary test He tried to fight it, but ultimately had no alternative. If he wants a second term, Mr Hollande will be the first ever incumbent French president to face a primary contest in his own party. The Socialists have decided to hold the contest in January. With the lowest approval ratings of any president in the Fifth Republic – now standing at 14 per cent - Mr Hollande saw little choice but to use the race to see off his leftist rivals and try to regain authority. “That’s democracy,” said Manuel Valls, prime minister. Le JDD notes the irony that the primary contest comes on the anniversary of Mr Hollande’s breakthrough rally in 2012, where he asked “who is my adversary?”

Mariano Rajoy’s second try Spain’s election on Sunday may have been won by Mr Rajoy’s centre-right party, but undercurrents threaten to topple him nonetheless. The FT’s Tobias Buck gives a great sense of the upheaval ahead through his interview with the most popular man in Spanish politics: Alberto Garzón, a 30-year old who believes in class struggle, Karl Marx, abolishing the monarchy and ultimately capitalism itself (which he reassuringly notes “won’t end overnight”). His Izquierda Unida group – in a leftist alliance with the bigger Podemos – could take a quarter of the vote and have a serious claim to forming a coalition. Mr Rajoy, the great survivor of Spanish politics, would rely on the embattled Socialists gambling their existence on a right-left coalition as theanswer to a populist uprising.

Two encouraging trends in the more positive weekend polls for Remain. Antony Wells of YouGov notes that the swing back started before the tragic murder of Labour MP Jo Cox,according to their survey work. His online poll also picked up a sharp rise in numbers that sensed they would be worse off after a Brexit vote.

This BMG poll has also given hope to Remain. The phone survey was more persistent in following up those within the sample who could not be reached at first attempt. That skewed pick-up rate was one of the flaws identified with the election polling – and the BMG technique helped Remain.

Markets are taking the hint. Sterling is rising again (the chart below shows the pound’s swing against the dollar this month). But be in no doubt – this contest is knife-edge, neck-and-neck, panic-stations close. The vote is Thursday.

Save this United Kingdom of tolerance and diversity (Schama, Weekend FT)

Boris beware: Democracy must be nurtured and protected (Patten, FT)

A vote to Leave is a vote for stability in Europe (Lawson, Sunday Times)

Sadly Jo Cox’s death will deepen post-vote divisions (Kirkup, Telegraph)

This hateful campaign is an ignoble hour for the British (Kornelius, Süddeutsche)

Take Britain back from this foul know-nothing movement (Cohen, Observer)

The great trade shock was big but has played itself out (Sandbu, Prospect)

How Boris Johnson helped warp Brit-pack journalism in Brussels (Fletcher)

Rethink starts for an EU battered by crises (Yardley, NY Times)

Observer backs Remain: hold faith in liberal democracies acting in concert

Sunday Times backs Brexit: time for a looser, more flexible EU deal

Sunday Telegraph is for Leave: the optimistic case for Britain as global player

Mail on Sunday says Remain: controlling immigration isn’t worth this risk

Poland’s patriots eye foreign banks Jaroslaw Gowin, Poland’s deputy prime minister, wants the state to buy up banks owned by foreign investors as part of a programme of “patriotic patriotism”. Well worth reading is his interview with the FT’s Henry Foy.

Schulz rides two horses Süddeutsche Zeitung travels with Martin Schulz, European parliament president, as he eyes a potential opening as the chancellor candidate for the SPD – provided his political friend Sigmar Gabriel steps aside before next year’s federal elections.

Altmaier grumbling Chancellor Merkel’s Mr Fix-it is taking some flak. Bild Zeitung note the increasing mutterings of discontent over Peter Altmaier’s handling of various issues, where his deal-making skills fell short.

French raid on Tory donor Buzzfeed report on French police charging 9 concerningsuspicions of money laundering and tax fraud at Lycamobile, a telecoms group that has donated more than £2.2m to the UK Conservative party.

To receive our Brussels briefing every morning in your email in-box, sign up here.

