FirstFT: Brexit vote looms, Saudi sees end of oil glut and Latin America's new management

2016-06-22

Sign up to receive FirstFT by email here

City workers queued up outside foreign exchange bureaux to cash in their pounds ahead of the EU referendum, as Prime Minister David Cameron made his final pitch with a patriotic appeal for a Remain vote: “Brits don't quit”. Meanwhile, global banks have begun looking at office space in Frankfurt as they consider whether they will need to shift some of their European operations out of London if Britain voted to leave.

FT View: a moment of destiny for Britain and Europe

Here's a look at Brexit in seven charts, and another set debunking years of tabloid claims about the menace of European bureaucracy. But perhaps the most important one right now is the poll of polls, which shows a slight edge for the Leave camp.

We should have a clear picture of the results by about 3.30am GMT, when Lancaster reports, with an official declaration expected around breakfast time in London on Friday. (FT, Economist)

Click here to see our special Brexit hub page on the new FT website.

New Saudi oil minister signals end to glut Khalid al-Falih signalled an end to the worst of the oil glut and indicated the Opec kingpin is preparing to reassert a degree of control over the market after two years of letting prices fall. (FT)

Donald Trump tries to turn focus off himself and on to his rival Presumptive Republican nominee Donald Trump attempted to shift attention away from a series of self-inflicted wounds that have hit his candidacy in recent weeks with a speech attacking Hillary Clinton as a disastrous secretary of state and “corrupt” politician. Fact checkers found a number of questionable claims in the speech, which came as Mr Trump's former Republican rival Marco Rubio announced he would run for re-election, in part to act as a check on the former reality TV star's “worrisome” positions. (FT, NYT) Keep track of the race with the FT’s daily US politics newsletter. Sign up here.

IMF: US risks future of low growth The fund warned that the US faces economic “headwinds” and “pernicious” trends, including a shrinking middle class that could slow growth in the long term, the International Monetary Fund has warned. (FT)

Janet Yellen warns on poor US productivity The IMF wasn’t the only one striking a pessimistic note on the US: the Fed chair also had a warning — about how low productivity could hamper America's prospects for much higher wage growth. (FT)

Democrats stage sit in over gun control Several dozen Democratic congressmen and congresswomen shut down the House of Representatives to protest at their chamber's lack of action on gun control measures in the wake of the deadliest mass shooting in modern US history. (Reuters)

N Korea tests missiles North Korea has test-fired two mid-range ballistic missiles from a base on the Sea of Japan, says South Korea. The first launch was considered to have failed, travelling about 150km (90 miles) before landing in the sea. But the second, launched hours later, flew about 400km and reached an altitude of 1,000km, the most effective test to date. A confirmed successful test would mark a step forward for North Korea after four failed launches in recent months. (BBC)

Japanese workplaces inching toward LGBT inclusion Employers in Japan are at long last being pushed toward embracing LGBT-friendly policies by businesses overseas, though changing corporate cultures could prove a tougher challenge. (NAR)

Britain There’s a bit of a referendum being held on Thursday. Perhaps you've heard. (FT)

Unicorns: the game! Try out a new FT interactive where you get to play the part of an IPO investor in a hot new tech start-up. (FT)

At home with the Grand Master of the Knights of Malta How did Matthew Festing, a former Grenadier Guardsman from Northumbria, become the leader of an enigmatic Catholic fraternity founded in the 11th century? Visit his home in a 16th-century villa to find out. (FT)

The new Panama Canal: a risky bet A multimedia look at the $3.1bn expansion of the waterway, which raises questions about its safety, the quality of its construction and its economic viability. (NYT)

Latin America: under new management Populism may be rising in Europe and the US — but a near continent-wide romance with the leftist leaders that rose to power in the 2000s has given way to “populism fatigue”, rage over state-sanctioned corruption and a swing to the political centre. (FT)

Video of the day



