Brexit: Cameron and Osborne are to blame for this sorry pass

2016-06-24

The people have spoken. Like any democrat, I respect the outcome of the referendum and believe the will of the voters must now be carried out. 

But that does not mean I am not angry. I feel no anger towards the millions who voted for Brexit: they did so out of a mixture of conviction, frustration and disillusionment with the status quo which was sincere and heartfelt. 

No, I am angry that my children’s future has been put at risk by a needless referendum. Angry at the brazen mendacity of a Leave campaign which has no idea what happens next. Angry at the careless elitism of Michael Gove, Boris Johnson, Steve Hilton and other leading Brexiters, parading themselves as tribunes of the people from their gilded worlds in Westminster, North London and California. 

Angry at the years of wilful misrepresentation of the EU by vested interests in the press. Angry at the betrayal that Brexit voters will feel when they realise — too late — that a land of milk and honey outside the EU does not exist.

Angry that the political stability, legal reliability and economic openness which have marked out Britain as a global leader have been casually cast aside. Angry that three-quarters of young people voted for a future — to remain in the EU — denied to them by their seniors. 

But my greatest anger is reserved for David Cameron and George Osborne — notwithstanding the dignity of the prime minister’s resignation. They and they alone are responsible for bringing our great country to this sorry pass.

This need never have happened. When we were in coalition with the Conservatives I was repeatedly asked by them to agree to a referendum on their terms.

 I refused point blank because elevating internal party rows to a national plebiscite is not good enough — especially since we had already enshrined into law in 2011 a referendum trigger to ratify future EU Treaties.

I remember asking the prime minister whether he was sure he could win a referendum designed to settle an internal Tory feud. I was breezily told that all would be well, of course it would be won. 

When the Conservatives unexpectedly won the general election last year their complacency only increased: they started to believe they could defy political gravity, on the winning side of the 2011 referendum on voting reform, the Scottish referendum in 2014 and now gifted with a majority of their own. 

They forgot that less than a quarter of eligible voters voted Conservative. Last year’s election victory was no mandate for the Tories — it was a vote against all the other likely alternatives. 

But they pressed on regardless — clogging up parliament with petty, partisan measures to clip the wings of trade unions, remove public funds from opposition parties, slash tax credits, grant tax bungs to their wealthy supporters and fiddle with constituency boundaries to cement their electoral advantage. 

When we were in coalition with the Conservatives I was repeatedly asked by them to agree to a referendum on their terms. I refused point blank

After Mr Osborne’s first budget unravelled I expected that they would tread more carefully. But still they pressed on — and the chancellor’s second budget was also eviscerated in the face of parliamentary opposition. 

But their greatest failing was this: having spent two decades striking poses as Eurosceptics to curry favour with their party they believed that they could change their tune in the last second of the eleventh hour in the referendum.

Voters are not stupid. I met many people in my own constituency in Sheffield who refused to follow Messrs Cameron or Osborne because they had been told the exact opposite by them for years.

Like all pro-Europeans, I sought to help the No 10-led referendum campaign — providing private advice and public support. But as the campaign wore on, it became clear that the prime minister and his chancellor were prisoners of their past: having spent so many years denigrating the EU, it was impossible for them to make a positive case. 

They were condemned to make a negative case — the EU is not great, but leaving would be worse — which lacked any emotional impact, culminating in the dismal “punishment budget” proposed by Mr Osborne last week. 

I feel for Mr Cameron and his family today — as I know well, abrupt defeat is not easy. My head is less forgiving. His and Mr Osborne’s fair-weather approach to Britain’s vital national interests in Europe has let future generations down. 

The message for internationalist, pro-European politicians in all parties is clear: we must never again allow our national interest to be hijacked by internal party feuds; we must take on the populists who only know how to destroy the links that bind nations together; we must work across parties to safeguard the Britain we believe in — a great people engaged with, not divorced from, our own European continent. 

The writer, former leader of the Liberal Democrats, was deputy prime minister in the 2010-15 coalition government 

