Office building in UK returns to pre-recession levels

2016-06-21

Office construction in the UK has returned to pre-recession levels for the first time in eight years.

About £2bn of contracts were awarded in the first quarter of 2016, in line with the boom years of 2007-08, according to figures from consultancy Barbour ABI.

Demand is being driven by a shortage of high-quality buildings in popular locations, after bank lending dried up and construction dropped sharply in the wake of the financial crisis. 

In London, office availability is at its lowest in 15 years. Last year was a record year for pre-lets of offices yet to be built in the “big six” regional cities of Manchester, Birmingham, Leeds, Bristol, Edinburgh and Glasgow, according to a separate report from JLL, the property advisers.

Although the bulk of new projects are in London, commercial property investors are shifting their focus to regional cities, as companies, particularly in financial services, shift administration and back office operations to cheaper locations. 

Manchester, in particular, requires an extra 3m sq ft of office space over the next 10 years, if it is to keep up with the city’s forecast growth, Barbour said. Liverpool, Glasgow and Cardiff are also in need of more high quality office space.

Michael Dall, chief economist at Barbour ABI, said that “barring the potential negative impact of Brexit on the construction industry”, he expected the trend to continue throughout 2016.

Contract values are increasing, with the figures including six large new developments, worth more than £50m each, among them a 10-storey £90m Waterloo Street block in Glasgow, and the £50m Forbury Place in Reading, Barbour said.

Construction and infrastructure companies are only just regaining profitability after being hit by a slowdown in commercial and public sector work after the financial crisis.

Employee numbers have fallen 13 per cent, or 337,000 people, since 2008 and a number of smaller companies have gone bust, as larger contractors chased smaller projects at lower margins.

Despite this, the recent surge in construction has given rise in parts of the property industry to concerns about oversupply.

Rob Noel, chief executive of Land Securities — the UK’s largest listed property company — has said he expects the balance to shift in favour of London office tenants in late 2017, or sooner if the UK votes to leave the EU.

However, analysts at Green Street Advisors, a research firm, highlight that London supply is low — with vacancy rates at less than 3 per cent — while net supply, which takes into account demolitions and conversions, has fallen since 2014.

“The overall [London] market is very tight and new space is needed,” said Hemant Kotak, managing director at Green Street.

Analysts predict that London demand in particular would be hard hit by an exit from the EU, with Mr Noel predicting a prolonged “demand shock”.

Other challenges for the construction industry include skills shortages. The number of construction qualifications awarded through apprenticeships, colleges and universities has fallen sharply, according to research by the Local Government Association, and labour costs are rising as a result.

– 

