Emerging markets join global risk rebound

2016-06-20

Bring out the rally monkey.

Emerging market assets joined the global rebound in risk assets as new opinion polls showed that the campaign for the UK to remain in the European Union was regaining momentum.

Easing concerns over the potential fallout from a so-called Brexit encouraged investors to move away from haven assets such as high grade sovereign bonds and gold – which were at the centre of a record breaking rally last week.

EM stocks and currencies were among the main beneficiaries of the markets’ renewed appetite for risk.

The MSCI Emerging Market index zoomed 1.9 per cent higher to help reverse some of last week’s 2.1 per cent decline. The rally was led by Brazil’s Bovespa stock index, which jumped 2.3 per cent, followed by bourses in Poland (+1.7 per cent), South Africa (+1.5 per cent), Mexico (+1.3 per cent) and Russia (+1 per cent).

On the currencies front, the JPMorgan Emerging Market Currency index was up 0.9 per cent, recouping all of its losses from last week. With the exception of the Indian rupee, all 24 of the major EM currencies tracked by Bloomberg gained against the dollar.

The South African rand was 2.5 per cent higher, while the currencies of Mexico, Brazil, Poland, Russia and Colombia all managed to post gains of more than 1 per cent.

With only three days to go before the UK holds its EU referendum, opinion polls put the ‘remain’ and ‘leave’ camp in a dead heat.

Concerns that UK citizens could vote in favour of the country leaving the EU and trigger ructions in the financial markets weighed heavily on the global equity markets last week.

Analysts at Capital Economics said the impact of a Brexit on EMs would most likely come via disruptions to global capital flows.

While we don’t envisage widespread or prolonged financial market dislocation, it’s reasonable to assume that a vote to leave would have a negative impact on business and global investor confidence. In the event that this triggers a rise in risk aversion and a pullback in capital flows to EMs, it could cause problems for economies with large external borrowing requirements.

Conversely, Capital Economics said if the UK vote to remain, then the markets’ focus would shift back to worrying about the Federal Reserve and China.

On these fronts, the news looks more positive.

…having been among the more bearish emerging market forecasters over the past couple of years, we now think the worst of the downturn in EM growth is behind us. A recovery in China should pull up the rest of Asia and also mean that conditions in most EM commodity producers (notably in Latin America) start to stabilise.

It added:

The resumption of Fed tightening could cause problems for a handful of EMs – notably Turkey and South Africa – but most emerging economies look well placed to weather a gradual rise in US rates.

