The economic shock of Brexit is the lesser problem

2016-06-24

For once, the market reaction is not an exaggeration. Investors have been seriously wrongfooted by the result of the UK referendum. But the shock of City traders on Friday morning is nothing compared with the stunned response of the people who thought they ran the country.

One way or another, we know markets will find their level — dramatically so, in the case of the pound. The British establishment will be in freefall for some time to come.

David Cameron will be blamed for setting us on this course — for putting the interests of Conservative party unity ahead of the country. For business people and policymakers outside the UK, the decision to trigger all the uncertainty of a referendum has long seemed a self-inflicted and entirely unnecessary wound. But the stark regional divide in the voting underscores that there is plenty of blame to go round.

It is not only Conservative governments that have failed to rebalance Britain’s economy in recent years — failed to give the country’s post-manufacturing hinterland a stake in London’s truly global success. It should be no surprise that large numbers have now voted to put that cosmopolitan prosperity at risk.

The economic and political questions raised by this vote will not be answered for years, possibly decades. But three immediate questions present themselves for investors and the wider world.

The first is how long the “risk-off” mood now permeating markets will last, and how much damage it will do. A prolonged decline in market confidence globally would make it more difficult for the US central bank to contemplate higher interest rates in the second half of this year, particularly with the presidential election looming. It would also put pressure on central banks with safe haven currencies, such as the yen and the Swiss franc, to ease policy to prevent them rising even further. At the extreme, it could persuade investors that the next bear market is nearer than they previously thought.

Whether that happens will depend on investors’ answers to the second immediate question, which is: how much damage will this do to real economic activity in the UK and further afield.

The best estimate has been that the shock will take at least a percentage point off the UK’s growth rate over the next year. So the annualised pace of growth in gross domestic product would fall from 1.6 per cent to about 0.6 per cent in the second half of 2016, with a similar growth rate in 2017. The fall in the pound would push inflation up to 3 or 4 per cent by the end of 2017, although given the slowdown in the economy we would expect that to be temporary. 

Clearly, there is huge uncertainty around those estimates, and about the likely impact on growth in the eurozone, which we reckon to be in the order of 0.4 percentage points of GDP over a similar period.

If this rough assessment is right, the Brexit vote has produced a large shock, but a local one. There will be an economic and financial impact on the rest of the world, and especially Europe, but it should be manageable. Whether the political implications will also be containable, particularly in Europe, is another matter.

That brings us to the third, and probably most important, question: what, exactly, will the UK leave to? There has been a lot of discussion already of the mechanics of Britain’s exit and how long it will all take. But the thorniest questions for the Leave side right now are not technical. They are profoundly philosophical.

Many leading figures in the Leave coalition want Britain to throw off the shackles of Brussels and seize the opportunities that the modern global economy presents. Yet many of the voters who chose Brexit are hoping for exactly the opposite. 

There are many potential visions for the UK after Brexit — not all of them disastrous. But there is none that would allow the country to be both open and closed — both to embrace the future and to turn back time. The real indictment of the Remain campaign is that, in all these months, they never got this basic incoherence in the Leave side across.

The writer is the chief markets strategist for Europe, JPMorgan Asset Management

