Pound surges as Brexit opinion polls show neck-and-neck race

2016-06-20

The pound posted its biggest gain in eight years on Monday after a series of polls showed that Britons are increasingly likely to vote to remain in the EU in Thursday’s contentious referendum on membership in the 28-country bloc.

Stock markets also moved higher in the UK and across the globe, reversing some of the most tangible signs of unease which had accompanied swelling support for Leave before the murder last week of Labour MP Jo Cox prompted a suspension of campaigning. 

Sterling is the most visible measure of global investor attitudes towards the referendum, and the rally — which saw the UK currency trade above $1.47 for the first time since May, a rise of more than 2 per cent — came amid increasing confidence within the Remain campaign that momentum had shifted back in its favour. 

Mike Amey, a portfolio manager for Pimco, said “the market has definitely gone from, at the most extreme, a 50/50 chance of Brexit back to a market implied possibility of around 75/25 for Remain”.

Sterling has swung wildly in recent days, and measures of volatility have spiked to levels last seen in the 2008 global financial crisis. The sharp increase on Monday underscored the potential for further market upheaval if the vote ultimately goes for Leave.

In Tuesday’s Guardian, financier George Soros, who bet against the pound when Britain crashed out of the EU exchange rate mechanism on “Black Wednesday” in 1992, warned: “A vote to leave could see the week end with a Black Friday.”

Last night an ORB poll for the Daily Telegraph gave Remain a 53/46 point lead, but a YouGov Times poll gave Leave a 51/49 advantage.

The Financial Times poll of polls has the contest finely balanced, with both sides registering support from 44 per cent of voters.

The FTSE 100 closed up 3 per cent, in a day of large gains for the shares of banks and housebuilders. The Stoxx Europe 600 index jumped 3.7 per cent, after the Nikkei 225 had earlier risen 2.3 per cent. 

The yield on the UK’s 10-year Gilt, which moves in the opposite direction to prices, rose 10 basis points to 1.25 per cent. The cost of insuring against a UK default fell 6 basis points — the biggest one day move since the depths of the eurozone crisis — to 35 basis points, or $35,000 annually to insure $1m of government debt for five years. 

Investment banks and asset managers are preparing for the possibility of further shifts in sentiment as the campaigns battle for the undecided voters likely to determine the outcome. 

————————-

UK’s EU Referendum: How people would vote

For a more detailed summary of opinion polling visit the FT’s Brexit poll tracker page

————————-

“They think it’s all over. It isn’t, yet,” said Kit Juckes, a macro strategist at Société Générale in London. “The market will surely gyrate some more in the next few days as any shift in that position triggers an exaggerated reaction, not just for sterling but for wider risk sentiment.”

Latest market moves and reaction in countdown to June 23 vote

Campaigning in the referendum remained subdued on Monday as parliament was recalled to Westminster to pay tribute to Ms Cox, who was remembered as a passionate and well-liked advocate for the disadvantaged both in her home constituency in Yorkshire as well war-torn regions like Syria.

The change in the campaign’s tenor has caused some infighting within the Leave campaign, with Sayeeda Warsi, a former Conservative party chair, announcing that she was switching to Remain because of Leave’s anti-immigrant rhetoric. 

Mr Cameron has seized on the uncertainty, claiming that the Leave camp has created a hostile and intolerant climate in the country through its focus on immigration.

The ripples had also spread around the rest of financial markets on Monday, with other currencies that tend to gain from upbeat market conditions, such as the Australian and Canadian dollars, also climbing. 

Additional reporting by Elaine Moore and Katie Martin

