Warm May drives clothes shoppers on to the UK high street

2016-06-16

British consumers hit the shops with gusto in May, shrugging off concerns about the looming EU referendum.

Retail sales volumes rose 6 per cent year on year, driven by a rebound in clothing sales as the weather turned from being unusually cold in April to warm in May.

Compared with April, a strong month, sales were up 0.9 per cent, the Office for National Statistics said, well above consensus expectations. 

The much better than expected data have boosted hopes that economic growth will come in far stronger than expected in the second quarter.

After a string of disappointing releases in the spring, economists across the City had rushed to downgrade growth forecasts. 

But while survey data remain fragile, in recent weeks there has been a notable bounceback in official data, with manufacturing and trade also performing well.

Alan Clarke, economist at Scotiabank, said the combination meant second-quarter gross domestic product “could be very respectable”. Martin Beck, senior economic adviser to EY Item Club, a forecasting group, said growth for the period was looking “very healthy”. 

Elizabeth Martins, economist at HSBC, said the retail figures supported her view that “the slowdown in the UK is being driven by weaker investment, rather than something more fundamental”.

It was clear that consumer spending was continuing to boost the economy, said Chris Williamson, chief economist of survey data company Markit, but he was still concerned that business investment could “have acted as a drag, not least due to rising worries about Brexit”.

All surveys of big businesses — most of which strongly back staying in the EU — have reported that spending decisions have been put on hold ahead of the referendum. But while consumer sentiment surveys have softened, they remain robust by historical standards.

Household spending continues to be buoyed by a recovering labour market — the unemployment rate is at its lowest in almost 11 years — and depressed prices. 

With continued low inflation, rock-bottom interest rates and a supermarket price war, average prices were 2.8 per cent lower than in May last year.

That means consumers have been able to buy more goods for less money, with the value spent on the high street rising just 3.1 per cent from a year ago. 

John Hawksworth, chief economist at PwC, said there was a “Darwinian struggle for survival for many high-street retailers, with long-established brands under constant pressure to adapt or perish”.

The big supermarkets such as Sainsbury and Tesco are being squeezed by the rise of discounters Aldi and Lidl, whose sales continue to rise. They are also facing the prospect of Amazon becoming a growing presence in the UK grocery market.

Appetite for online spending is clearly growing among consumers. The amount spent online surged 21.5 per cent compared with the previous May.

But physical purchases still take up the lion’s share of retailing. Online purchases accounted for 14 per cent, excluding fuel, up from 12 per cent the previous year. 

