UK referendum – how it is viewed by the European media

2016-06-23

With less than four hours still to go before voting closes in the UK’s EU membership referendum, it’s not only domestic newspapers and TV channels that are fixated with scenes from around Britain. fastFT has been looking at how media in the rest of Europe has reported the event, which is only the third UK-wide referendum in history.

France’s Le Monde has tried to explain to its readers what concrete consequences there would be in the event of a vote to leave the EU (see picture from its website below). The 12 questions the paper has laid out in a Q&A offer an interesting insight into what issues French readers may be most concerned about. Among the questions Le Monde tackles is:

While Le Monde‘s website is leading with voting in the UK at publication time, rival Le Figaro is more concerned with ongoing strikes in France. But it does carry an interesting article about how Paris’s financial centre is preparing a charm offensive in the event that the Brexit campaign prevails. Other rival financial centres to the City of London – Frankfurt, Luxembourg and Dublin – also want to roll out the red carpet to grab a slice of business, Brexit or no Brexit, Le Figaro reports (see headline below). The article reads:

If the British decide to leave this Thursday, financial centres won’t wait very long to use everything in their arsenal to attract financial players from the City [of London]

German tabloid Bild is, rightly, concerned with the events today in western Germany, where police shot dead a gunman who stormed a cinema (more on that here from the FT’s Stefan Wagstyl in Berlin). But it is running a fun tongue-in-cheek quiz to coincide with the referendum asking: How British are you? Questions include (see first image above):

The Frankfurter Allgemeine takes a more serious approach, making it clear in a comment piece entitled “Dear Britons, think also of Frankfurt” (see image below):

We in Frankfurt are of course against Brexit.

Follow the FT’s referendum live blog for the latest updates from around the UK here.

