The Diary: John Kampfner

2016-06-24

Jitters over Brexit was not the only reason for the nervousness gripping the Mad Men of Cannes. Originally an advertising fest, the Cannes Lions International Festival of Creativity has morphed into a global gathering of tech firms and media, alongside the giants of the ad world and the upstarts. 

A sector defined by macho can-do has much to ponder. How to deal with the dominance of Google and Facebook? How to cope with margins driven down by newspapers, magazines and other “traditional formats” watching their revenues shrink? Earlier this month, the Association of National Advertisers, the industry’s oldest trade association in the US, sparked a public bust-up by accusing ad agencies of padding profits by taking rebates from media groups and not disclosing them to clients.

Throw in perennial concerns about the “next big disruptive idea”, about talent and diversity, and you might think they’d all be hunkering down. Not a bit of it. Night after night, the champagne and cocktails flow as corporates from the Daily Mail to YouTube, via AOL (remember them?) vie to hold the glitziest party on the beach or, better still, yacht. “Don’t believe it,” a friend says of this bravado, “they all feel embattled.”

So how to navigate the week-long revelry? I call on two doyennes of the media world. Editor-in-chief of Cosmopolitan magazine and recently appointed to the board of Snapchat, Joanna Coles is one of the more illustrious faces in New York’s Brit-pack. As she and I drink coffee on the terrace of the Carlton hotel, a succession of media and advertising bosses do a “stop and chat” with her. How’s business? she asks. Couldn’t be better, they respond in unison, comparing their smart pads in Connecticut. 

A stroll along the Croisette, past ice-cream vendors and bathers, takes me to the Hotel Martinez. The seventh-floor balcony is home to MediaCom. Karen Blackett, its UK chairwoman and a rare exception to the white-male dominance of the sector, is keen to talk about getting fresh talent into Britain’s creative scene. As we stare out at the cruise ships, we talk at length about the challenges facing cities such as Birmingham and Liverpool. How do we ensure that creative companies stay put and don’t leg it to the capital once they become successful? How can we make sure that investment in culture outside London remains strong? Or that the government understands the importance of arts alongside science and maths in schools? We plot our next steps.

Across the creative industries, not just in Britain but around the world, everyone is talking about diversity. From architecture to music, boardrooms are all too often the preserve of white, privately educated, males. One of the most innovative awards given out is called the Glass Lion, which rewards companies that try to break down gender inequality and assorted prejudices. This year’s laureates included an American advert using man-boobs to highlight female breast cancer, and one from India encouraging men to do their share of the laundry.

The festival is quietly presided over by the Lions’ indefatigable chief executive Philip Thomas, who, in his 10 years in charge, has transformed it into a keenly awaited and highly profitable venture, with a mix of strong speakers and awards — plus, of course, the fun and frolics. 

“Welcome to trauma,” said one participant at a closed session of chief executives that I had been invited to. “No matter where you are, you always think you should be somewhere else.” 

Was he talking about his sojourn in Cannes or the travails of his industry? I suggested that the key for all parts of the creative economy is to mix with new people. Get the tech investor in the room with the poet, encourage the video games designer to talk to the theatre director, let a thousand new creative ideas bloom, and — who knows? — the bottom line may benefit as a result. 

How many of the 15,000 delegates would rock up if the Lions festival took place not in Cannes but in Cluj? Actually Cluj is cool, or it’s becoming so. In the Creative Industries Federation’s first international report, launched next month, we highlight Romania’s second city as an up-and-coming centre of creative, digital and technological nous.

In Britain, the arts and digital sectors still have some way to go to get the best out of each other. Even geographically, London’s cultural sector tends to be based in the West End and the tech community in the east, around or beyond Silicon Roundabout. That’s why I was keen that we played our part in London Technology Week, which continues this weekend. 

Hosting an event with the group Tech London Advocates, I wanted to tease out how creative organisations that have been around decades, if not centuries, can learn from start-ups — and vice versa. It was intriguing to hear Brainlabs’ Sophie Newton talking about the work her company does with the Royal Academy, using pay-per-click data analytics to improve their online marketing strategy. What would RA founder Sir Joshua Reynolds have made of that?

John Kampfner is chief executive of the Creative Industries Federation

Illustration by: Shonagh Rae

