Jo Cox murder suspect was ‘friendly but a loner’

2016-06-16

The man suspected of killing the Labour MP Jo Cox lives alone just a short walk from her office, on Birstall’s main council estate.

Neighbours said that police had arrived at Thomas Mair’s terraced home about an hour after the Batley and Spen MP was shot outside the village library.

He was a quiet man who was friendly but appeared to be a loner, they said.

David Pickles, 62, who lived two doors down, said that Mr Mair would often give him gardening tips as he passed. “He was always doing people’s gardens for them. He did the garden for the lady over the road permanently.”

He had lived with his grandmother until she passed away, his neighbours said.

Mr Mair, believed to be 52, had lived in the house for 32 years, according to the electoral register. He was not thought to have a job but regularly walked into the village centre to use the computers at the local library.

According to local newspaper reports, he had volunteered at a country park.

Police declined to confirm that Mr Mair was the man they arrested shortly after Ms Cox, 41, was shot at about 1pm. She was arriving for a constituency surgery.

Kathleen Cooke, 62, who lives in the same street, said that she had seen him pass shortly after noon. He was wearing a baseball cap and carrying a rucksack. “He was a nice fellow, very helpful. He kept himself to himself.”

The Fieldhead estate is bedecked in England flags because of the Euro 2016 football tournament. But there was none outside Mr Mair’s neat end terrace. Police forensic officers were searching the house and a row of garages behind it.

An officer stood guard as people gathered to chat and drink beer after England’s triumph over Wales.

Witnesses said that the assailant had used a homemade gun to shoot Ms Cox several times while she lay on the ground.

MP worked in some of the world’s most dangerous war zones before standing for parliament

Hichem Ben Abdallah, who worked in a local café, said that staff and customers had come running out when they heard a gunshot. 

Ms Cox was lying between two parked cars. A man tried to restrain the attacker but he lashed at him with a knife. “He said something, I could not hear what, then he fired at her. I could see it was Jo Cox. He fired three or four times.”

He said that the gun looked homemade or like a sawn-off shotgun.

The market square in Birstall and the street outside the library were also taped off by police as forensic officers examined the scene, at the foot of the steps up to the building.

Residents gathered to express their shock. Effectively a suburb of Leeds, Birstall is not affected by the gun violence that plagues some inner cities.

“It is a quiet town,” said Richard Bramham, pushing his toddler through the streets. “You only get a bit of petty crime. I cannot believe this has happened.”

Zain Ali, 21, who works in a taxi office, said that community relations were good. “Around here it is Asian, white, black — everyone gets along. Everyone has their lives to live.”

