Business rushes to reassure on Brexit despite share price falls

2016-06-24

Business woke up on Friday morning to the reality of a British exit from the EU, with sharp share price falls and other market volatility adding to anxiety about future trading relationships with the rest of the world.

Carolyn Fairbairn, director-general of the CBI, said the priority for business was for government and the Bank of England to work together to ensure stability.

“This was not the outcome our members wanted, and they will take time to work out the implications and consequences,” she told the FT. 

“The next stage will be for business to engage really strongly with government around [their] priorities, particularly best possible access to the single market.”

Ms Fairbairn said one priority was to have “a mature and grown-up conversation around immigration” so that companies could guarantee they would be able to get the staff they needed in the future.

The European Round Table of Industrialists, which groups together 51 chairmen and chief executives of leading multinationals including BP and Rolls-Royce in the UK, said it was “disappointed” at the result.

“Our continent has benefited immeasurably from our European Union to which the UK, as a core member for over 40 years, has made an enormous contribution,” it said.

“Our joint challenge will be now to forge new partnerships and to further growth opportunities so that both regions continue to thrive.”

Despite the market falls— with banking and construction stocks leading the declines — multinationals operating in the UK were swift to attempt to reassure the market that it would be “business as usual”.

Switzerland’s Nestlé, the world’s largest food and drinks company, which employs 7,000 people in the UK, said the practical consequences of the vote would become clearer in the coming months, but it would “continue to operate in the normal course”.

City leaders stunnedBusiness leaders respond with shock and horror, writes Patrick Jenkins

Lombard: disaster for City and business Vote to leave the EU will bring extended market volatility

Bank shares plungeThe sell-off in financial stocks has been swift and brutal

Europe and US feel impactBanks across Europe and the US were hit

High street batteredLondon-listed retailers lost close to a third of their value in the minutes after markets opened

Dealmakers seek bargainsM&A rumours abound as concerns emerge about LSE-Deutsche Börse merger

Carmaker BMW said that although it was clear there would now be a period of uncertainty, there would be “no immediate change to our operations in the UK”.

“We know that many of the relevant conditions for supplying the European market will have to be renegotiated, but of course we cannot say what this means for our UK operations until those future regulatory and legislative arrangements are agreed,” it said.

SAP, the German software maker, said it hoped that a “positive exit settlement” would be reached quickly, “minimising the uncertainty to business, as the UK moves from valued member to valued partner of the European Union”.

Toshiaki Higashihara, chief executive of Hitachi, which is building a train plant in County Durham, said it would carefully examine the impact on its businesses of a Brexit and “consider the next steps to take”.

Others reacted with disbelief. Maurice Lévy, chief executive of Publicis, one of the world’s largest advertising groups, which makes 6-7 per cent of its revenues in the UK, said he was “shocked” and “stunned” by the news.

He said Brexit was “a big wake-up call for the European Union”. “We put so much emphasis on the economic aspects of union that we ignored the emotional aspect. Patriotism is something that you cannot explain rationally but it is important and there is no European patriotism. We got sidetracked by the small issues.”

However, on the economic effects, Mr Lévy said these would not be catastrophic. “I don’t see any major crisis,” he said. “If you compare it with 2008, it will not be nearly as bad. When you have weak currencies in a robust market, even if there is some turmoil, the market is not going to collapse. The Brits are still going to be there, they will continue to live and to spend.”

He said Publicis’ presence in the UK was “a longstanding investment . . . we are not going to change our strategy”.

UK business representative groups also attempted to give reassurance.

Simon Walker, director-general of the Institute of Directors, said the months ahead would be “a nervy time” for business leaders and they would need to know that the government was focused on maintaining stability. But, he said, “British businesses are resilient and, with their characteristic ingenuity, they will weather this storm”.

Steve Varley, UK chairman of Ernst & Young, said businesses would now need to “hit the button” on the contingency plans that many had been working on in recent months.

“Communicating with staff about any potential employment issues that might arise, including the working and travel rights of European and UK employees, will be a high priority for many,” he said.

Shares in international carmakers with manufacturing plants in the UK fell sharply in early trade, as producers like Nissan, Honda, Toyota and BMW faced decisions over whether to maintain their current levels of investment in Britain.

Although all of the carmakers confirmed their commitment to the UK in the run-up to the vote, a number have warned that leaving the EU would make their British plants less competitive when tendering for new work.

Analysts said that, while specific sectors would be harder hit than others, the most immediate impact would be uncertainty about future trading conditions. 

“The decision raises significant uncertainty with respect to the conditions for UK companies trading in the EU, the basis for EU businesses operating in the UK and the status of the UK’s wider commercial relationships with the EU’s bilateral and regional trading partners,” said John Forrest, head of international trade at DLA Piper. 

“The predictability, stability and legal certainty with which UK and EU companies currently trade with each other are now up for renegotiation.”

Smaller businesses, where support for Brexit had been higher than among large listed companies, needed to have confidence restored, said Mike Cherry, national chairman of the Federation of Small Businesses.

“We need clarity on what it means for access to the single market and for employment,” Mr Cherry told the FT. 

“Those businesses out in rural areas who rely on immigrants to get the crops off the fields, it’s these very simple questions that they want answered.”

Additional reporting by Mark Wembridge in Hong Kong

