IMF warns of political risk to eurozone recovery

2016-06-16

The International Monetary Fund has warned that a marked rise in political risks threatens to derail the eurozone’s still fragile recovery, adding that the region is at a “critical juncture”, a week ahead of the UK’s vote on whether to remain in the EU.

In an unusually strongly phrased intervention, the fund urged the eurozone’s economic decision makers to take swift action to counter growing political divisions and scepticism about the EU project. 

The fund is increasingly concerned over rising political risks around the world ranging from protectionist rhetoric in the US presidential campaign to support for populist parties in Europe.

It also is anxious about the potential impact on the global economy and financial markets of British voters deciding to quit the EU. 

The IMF used the concluding statement of its annual policy assessment of the eurozone to call on political leaders to reform their labour and product markets and for countries to spend more if they have the capacity to do so. 

“Without more decisive actions to boost growth and strengthen integration, the euro area may be subject to instability and repeated crises of confidence,” the IMF said, while also stressing the importance of complying with rules on budget deficits and debt-to-GDP ratios. 

However, the Fund acknowledged that divisions and Euroscepticism had “weakened prospects for collective action”, which left the single currency area “increasingly vulnerable to risks while there is little policy space”

It also warned that the European Commission and national capitals have been lax in policing agreed limits on national debt and deficits, saying that enforcement of the rules had been “weak, undermining credibility in the framework.”

Its intervention comes as the IMF braces for another round of criticism of its role in the controversial bailouts of Greece and other euro area economies in recent years. The Fund’s own independent watchdog is expected to release an examination of its role in responding to the euro crisis in the coming weeks. 

Without more decisive actions to boost growth and strengthen integration, the euro area may be subject to instability and repeated crises of confidence,

While the eurozone’s economy performed well in the opening part of 2016, growing by 0.6 per cent between the final quarter of 2015 and the first quarter of this year, the IMF said the strong start to the year “should not lead to complacency”. The eurozone economy has now surpassed its pre-crisis peak — eight years after Lehman Brothers’ collapse — but the outlook in the years ahead was “still weak.”

“Crisis legacies, such as high non-performing loans in some banking systems, elevated levels of public and private debt, and still high unemployment, hold back potential growth and perpetuate imbalances. Productivity remains below pre-crisis levels and faces greater pressures from adverse demographics,” the IMF said, adding high unemployment and debt burdens would persist without more decisive action. 

Gerry Rice, an IMF spokesman, said on Thursday that the Fund was now examining a series of potential scenarios to prepare for the possibility of a June 23 UK vote to leave the EU, which polls indicate is an increasing possibility. 

Some pro-Leave politicians in the UK have accused the IMF of political interference in the wake of the Fund’s repeated warnings about the possible risks of Brexit .

“The decision is clearly the prerogative of the British people. We fully respect that,” Mr Rice told reporters.

He also defended the IMF’s contingency planning for a possible Brexit vote. “It is a core element of our remit to think about various risks to the global outlook and about policy measures to reduce or respond to them. We think about these risks all the time. That is our job,” he said.

