‘There is no real upside [of Brexit] for asset managers’

2016-06-19

Ask any UK asset management boss whether their company will be badly affected by Britain leaving the EU, and you get a resounding “no”. 

At a recent event with the chief executive of one of the UK’s largest listed asset managers, I flagged the concerns analysts have raised about the ramifications of a British exit, or Brexit, from the EU, for the fund market. 

The chief executive laughed off these fears. “They must be smoking something,” he said. 

This head-in-the-sand moment for the industry is demonstrative of either hopeless naivety among investment executives, or a deliberate attempt to prevent panic among clients and shareholders by denying the risks Brexit poses. 

Morgan Stanley analysts, for instance, have highlighted Standard Life Investments, Schroders and Henderson, the UK investment managers, as particularly exposed to Brexit, given how much money they hold in Ucits funds, retail products that fall under EU rules. 

But Andrew Formica, chief executive of Henderson, the UK’s third-largest listed fund house, is remarkably relaxed about the outcome of the referendum, which will be held on Thursday. 

His attitude stems from the fact that his company has UK-based funds for UK clients, and a Luxembourg-based fund range for European clients, which he believes will continue to function whatever the referendum outcome.

“There may be a requirement to increase resourcing in Luxembourg [following an out vote], but that would be relatively modest,” he says. 

Keith Skeoch, chief executive of Standard Life Investments, also told FTfm in February: “[Brexit] would not be a major, major problem for us. We will ensure we can structure ourselves to continue to serve European clients.”

Legal & General, the UK’s largest investment manager, with more than $1tn of assets, similarly says “a vote to leave would have little direct impact on trading” for the company. 

But these assumptions are dangerously naive, according to the vast majority of experts on this topic at industry associations, regulatory consultancies, law firms and banks. 

My suspicion is most investment management chief executives are very aware of the huge risks to their businesses of an Out vote, they just don’t want to admit it. But in case they are truly unaware of the risks, here is a short summary.

First, in the short term, markets will be highly volatile following an Out vote. And when markets look scary, retail investor money tends to flow straight out of the fund industry and into cash accounts, or under the mattress. Lower net flows and weaker markets will in turn translate into falling revenues and profits for asset managers. 

Analysts warn that fund companies are naive about the impact of leaving the EU

Second, over the long term, costs are likely to increase. Justin Bates, an analyst at Liberum, the brokerage, believes fund companies with UK headquarters will have to establish much larger overseas offices with greater staff numbers to continue benefiting from European passporting rules. These rules enable asset managers to sell funds across Europe with ease. 

Third, there is widespread concern that a post-Brexit EU will take revenge on the City of London by preventing UK-headquartered asset managers from gaining access to European markets. 

Joe Sullivan, chief executive of Legg Mason, who is franker than most, says his US-listed company is likely to shift its UK-based management company to Dublin if Britain leaves the EU, to counteract some of these problems. 

“Whichever way you look at it, there is no real upside [of Brexit] for the asset management industry. The only real question is how damaging it will be,” says Mr Bates. 

One regulatory expert, speaking on condition of anonymity, agrees Brexit will be “profoundly disruptive for the industry, entailing substantial legal costs, a huge repapering exercise and extensive rewriting of regulatory handbooks”.

By refusing to acknowledge these dangers, fund companies are inadvertently creating a new one: angering the analyst and shareholder community with their insincerely cheery take on the referendum. 

As Alexander Friedman, the chief executive of GAM, discovered last week when the Swiss asset manager posted an unexpected profit warning, analysts really don’t like it when companies are not upfront about business risks. 

If the referendum outcome does swing in favour of Britain leaving the EU — as the polls and bookmakers are increasingly suggesting it might — I strongly suspect there will be sharp share-price falls and profit warnings to come from the listed asset management universe. 

It is time for fund bosses to get their heads out of the sand and be upfront about the dangers Brexit poses. The clock is ticking. 

