Wealth managers must navigate an increasingly uncertain world

2016-06-16

It has not been a good year for investors. A cocktail of global economic problems dragged down performance for wealth managers in 2015, and as uncertainty continues to stalk the markets, more managers are turning to alternative investments in the search for alpha. 

While not quite the worst performance since our survey began — that dubious honour belongs to 2011 — investors in balanced or growth portfolios had little to celebrate last year.

According to Wealth-X, the data provider and the FT’s research partner, the average balanced portfolio posted returns of just 2.3 per cent in 2015 — down from 4.8 per cent the year before. To put this in context, the average balanced portfolio posted returns of 11.3 per cent in 2013, and 9.1 per cent in 2012.

Nor has it been a good year for the average growth fund, where returns were 3.2 per cent — down from 5.1 per cent in 2014, 14.9 per cent the year before and 10 per cent in 2012. 

Many of the problems faced by those managing our money in 2015 have persisted into 2016. Worries over the slowdown in China continue, the outlook for the oil price and commodities markets remains uncertain, and more of the world’s central banks have introduced negative rates with $10tn of bonds now also in minus territory. 

Bill Gross, founder of Pimco and now at Janus Capital, has dubbed the trend in negative rates a “supernova that will explode one day”.

On top of this, with just days to go until the UK referendum, is the fear of what a potential Brexit could do to markets.

“The uncertainty surrounding the EU referendum in the UK is acting as somewhat of a damper on the market,” says David Saunderson, chief executive of Cantab Asset Management.

————————-

UK’s EU referendum: full coverage and analysis

View the FT’s comprehensive guide to the vote on whether Britain should stay in Europe, with all the latest news, analysis and commentary from both sides of the debate. See more 

————————-

Others point towards the mixed signals from the US Federal Reserve on monetary policy. Investors had hoped the decision to raise interest rates in the US last year would mark the start of a wider turnround, but hopes of subsequent rises have been quashed.

“We think the Fed lost the plot around the time of QE3,” says Gareth Lewis, chief investment officer at Tilney Bestinvest. “Their natural bias about supporting Wall Street over Main Street is coming back to bite them. They have boxed themselves into a corner over the economy.”

Millennials force wealth managers to up their game‘Gamification’ tactics used to lure the next generation of younger clients 

Investors learn to navigate minus territory Negative bond yields and interest rates make search for growth even harder 

In a low-return environment, you need to focus on costsWill consolidation of wealth managers be good for clients?

Robot or human: who’s the best wealth manager? Can online services cope with a bear market, ask critics

Just another service your wealth manager can provideFrom stag parties to reservations at celebrity restaurants

Bigger seems to be better for wealthy clientsMergers have not resulted in staff cutbacks, Wealth-X finds

Download the Private Client Wealth Management supplement here (pdf)

But it is not all bad news for investors. Relatively speaking, while the returns achieved by wealth managers in 2015 were low, they are still in positive territory — unlike the FTSE All-World Index. 

In 2015, the index fell by almost 4 per cent, having risen 3 per cent over the previous 12 months. Two stellar calendar years in 2012 and 2013, in which the index rose both years by approximately 16 per cent, capped a disastrous 12 months in 2011 when it fell by just under 10 per cent. 

Compared with the FTSE All-World index, investors have been spared the full impact of wobbles in the global economy.

Indeed, with uncertainty rife, fund managers have largely played safe this year and sat on their hands in terms of asset allocation. Since last year’s survey, there has been little movement in the make-up of the vast majority of growth or balanced portfolios.

Yet despite the nervousness within the ranks of professionals managing our money, there have been some standout stars (note: both top portfolios have not been verified by the report’s performance analyst Asset Risk Consultants). 

London & Capital achieved the top-performing returns on the average growth portfolio, posting a five-year return of just over 56 per cent. Over three years, returns stood at 29.84 per cent, but shrank back to 1.8 per cent in 2015, reflecting the difficult investment environment. 

Looking towards the longer term, Iain Tait, head of the private investment officer at L&C, ascribes the performance to “an outsized bet within fixed income”. 

“For L&C, a growth mandate will still have a much higher proportion of fixed income than our peer group,” he says. “We tend to be more comfortable stretching the boundaries of where we can find good risk-adjusted returns in fixed income; we tend to be bolder in fixed income and more conservative in equities.”

A strategy of favouring capital preservation is one that Mr Tait readily admits will be left behind when “animal spirits reign”, but for now, playing it cautious has paid off. 

Cantab Asset Management takes the honours over five years for the average balanced portfolio, recording returns of more than 47 per cent. The three-year figure remains a healthy 33 per cent, while in 2015 returns achieved 6.8 per cent.

“In general, Cantab prefers to focus investment decisions on long-term trends rather than short-term events,” explains Mr Saunderson, “although we are careful to avoid the pitfalls these might bring.”

Increasing volatility on world stock markets means managers have sought to de-risk their portfolios by looking elsewhere for income. For some of those surveyed in this year’s report, that has meant hedge funds. Pilloried for their headline underperformance — billionaire investor Steve Cohen recently said he was “ blown away by the lack of talent” in the industry — hedge funds still have their supporters.

The industry has ballooned thanks to pension funds. Now institutional investors are taking a look at costs and returns

However, Mr Lewis at Tilney Bestinvest adds a caveat. “Private clients will view hedge funds as an amorphous bucket of high fees and high volatility investment vehicles,” he warns. “But we’re trying to invest in areas where we have reasonable clarity on what’s going on, and understand the strategy and visibility where they’re positioned; and, more importantly, where they’re not trying to take on increasing levels of leverage.”

It is not about the “aggressive long-short stuff”, he qualifies, but rather returning to the traditional notion of a hedge fund — namely hedging against other risks faced when investing in equities and bonds. 

Mr Lewis is not alone in favouring alternative strategies. Allocations to hedge funds in both balanced and growth portfolios top 15 per cent for a handful of fund managers, according to the Wealth-X data.

For StJohn Gardner, head of investment management at Arbuthnot Latham, the private bank, recent quibbles in the press over performance do not drill down into the detail of what hedge funds can offer. 

“It is true that it has been a challenging year for global macro strategies and there tend to be some large popular funds in this area,” he says. “However, there have been plenty of opportunities for long-short equity funds to profit from material differences in stock price movements globally.”

The search for income in this low-interest rate environment has also seen many managers turn to property as an alternative. At just 4 per cent, real estate remains relatively low as a proportion of the average balanced portfolio, one percentage point lower than the allocation to hedge funds. Yet it is growing in popularity, and not just for the sake of diversification.

“We’re hoping that commercial property will come out the other side [of the EU referendum] and be largely unaffected by any concerns,” says Steven Richards, associate director at Thesis Asset Management. “We feel reasonably comfortable that prices won’t react overnight to an exit.”

When the UK votes on June 23 on whether to stay in the European Union, fund managers will be poised to move — in either direction — when the markets open the following morning. Cash holdings in the average balanced and growth portfolios remain relatively high at 5 per cent within the average balanced portfolio. 

Brexit tops the list of their concerns. When asked by Wealth-X which event would have the most positive or negative influence on their investment outlook, wealth managers overwhelmingly said the question of Britain leaving the EU was the primary worry. Just 3 per cent said it would be positive, 50 per cent replied negative and — reflecting the UK’s indecision as a whole — 47 per cent said they simply did not know. 

Many are biding their time. Turmoil can also equal opportunity. Steven Richards at Thesis Asset Management denies the current 11 per cent cash position across the growth portfolios is a direct response to Brexit. It is more a decision informed by the “general feeling that the bull run over the past six years has run its course”, he says.

However, Mr Richards readily admits the cash position will be useful should there be repercussions come June 24. “It gives us something to use should markets react afterwards, to have a bit of cash to use should there be any opportunities.”

The risk to UK equities of Brexit is real, adds Gareth Lewis at Tilney Bestinvest. But the uncertainty is also not without its benefits. “Further sterling weakness probably isn’t bad for the FTSE in terms of exporters. So in the medium term we could see sterling weakness help pockets of the UK market.”

Ultimately, though, he remains loath to position the portfolios with regard to Brexit. “Timing the market is impossible,” Mr Lewis says. 

