EU’s Article 50 could become first Brexit stand-off

2016-06-24

There is one formal route out of the EU: Article 50 of the Lisbon treaty. This so-called exit clause is highly contentious and may become the subject of the first stand-off between Brussels and Brexit Britain. 

The article establishes the balance of power for divorce talks. It lays down the voting rules for deciding how to part ways, and sets a two-year deadline on talks that can only be extended by a unanimous decision of the other 27 EU countries. 

So while starting the formal break-up process is in Britain’s hands, a decision on how and when to end it would not be. For this reason, before formal divorce talks start, Britain would want assurances about future trade arrangements or transition to avoid a Brexit hard-landing.

This is partly why David Cameron, the departing prime minister, is trying to leave the decision on triggering Article 50 to his successor as British prime minister — much to the annoyance of those in the EU who want a fast, clean break. 

What is Article 50?

For the first 50 years of the European project, there was no formal treaty provision allowing the withdrawal of a member state. France proposed putting an exit clause in the 1957 Treaty of Rome but was rebuffed, possibly to deter countries thinking it was a realistic option. It was finally agreed in 2007. 

What is now Article 50 sets out a path for member states to inform EU partners they are leaving, and for a streamlined way for that divorce to be negotiated and agreed. It has never been used, and its content is contested. Some EU lawyers think it has so many gaps and flaws that it was designed never to be used.

The article lays down how the EU-27 choose a negotiator, the two-year renewable deadline for talks and the voting arrangements to reach an agreement (weighted majority) or extend the deadline (unanimity). 

Can it be used to agree a new trade deal?

No. Most lawyers in Brussels and Whitehall see Article 50 as only deciding the terms of separation — basically ending the obligations and responsibilities that stem from being an EU member. The substance of talks would range from budget contributions to the transition arrangements for expats and cross-border companies. 

Future trade terms between Britain and the EU would be settled in a separate trade agreement, which may not be concluded at the same time. Senior EU officials think there may be a gap of several years. 

Trade deals are harder to agree. While Article 50 only needs a weighted majority of EU countries to be concluded, a broad trade deal will need unanimity and ratification by national parliaments. 

This means that as well as EU leaders, more than 30 national, European and regional assemblies also have a veto. So, for instance, a trade deal could be vetoed by six separate Belgian parliaments, including the assembly of the 76,000-strong German-speaking community. Some referendums on the issue would also be likely. 

Can Britain be forced to pull the trigger?

The clause is quite clear. Only the British government can decide when to invoke Article 50. It is not designed to oust a country from the EU.

That said, the EU can apply considerable leverage to force Britain to start formal divorce talks. A strongly worded joint statement by some of the EU’s top officials on Friday urged Britain to “give effect to this decision of the British people as soon as possible, however painful that process may be. Any delay would unnecessarily prolong uncertainty.” 

That statement also made clear what the EU would hold back. It makes no reference to starting trade talks with Britain at the same time. And it bluntly states that any future trade agreement “would be concluded with the UK as a third country” — in other words, after it has left the EU. 

Senior EU officials say they are willing to wait for Mr Cameron’s successor. But once another prime minister is appointed, they expect Article 50 to be triggered. The bottom line is: “no negotiation without notification,” said one senior EU official who will be involved in talks.

Is there an alternative to Article 50?

There are other ways out of the union — but these would be regarded as hostile acts by the EU. 

John Redwood, senior Conservative MP and Eurosceptic, told the BBC that “a lot of us don’t think there is any need to trigger Article 50 any time at all.” He has long advocated changing UK law — potentially by repealing the 1972 European Communities act — to unilaterally end Britain’s obligations to the EU. 

The Leave campaign has laid down options for a similar approach, where Britain would legislate to say it is leaving the union at a certain date, curb the power of EU judges and tighten rules on EU migration. 

Alarmed by this prospect, EU lawyers have looked at ways to strong-arm Britain if a Brexit government starts to roll back common EU laws without seeking to formally leave the union. 

One radical option is to take any Brexit bill passed in the House of Commons as the formal “notification” required to start the Article 50 procedure.

As a last resort, lawyers are looking at procedures to suspend application of Britain’s rights within the single market, a move that would dramatically increase uncertainty for UK companies exporting to or operating on the continent.

