If Britain leaves, the rest of Europe will face hard choices

2016-06-22

If the UK were to vote to leave the EU, the European Council — originally set for June 28-29 — would be brought forward to the day after the referendum. Council members would then need to reassure markets of their commitment to the EU before the Australian markets open at 2am Central European Time on Monday June 27. What should they deliver?

Since the beginning of the euro crisis, European leaders have been struggling to agree on what they want to do with “Europe”. Their lack of conviction and their apparent reluctance to take a united and constructive stance has generated doubt, division and disappointment. Indeed, their hesitation in uniting has had a direct and corrosive effect on the European project through the slow but steady deterioration of the eurozone economy. In turn, this has fuelled populism and resentment towards a Europe that is failing to deliver growth and jobs but succeeding in inflicting fiscal pain. 

The European Central Bank has already saved the eurozone from catastrophe more than once, but it cannot and should not be considered a substitute for political action on further European integration. If politicians accept fragmentation, then there is not much the ECB can do to preserve the unity of money, the stability of the banking system and the performance of the economy. And, if the impact of a possible Brexit does not serve to concentrate the minds of EU leaders, the European project will unravel sooner rather than later. 

Since 2010, European leaders have been fighting the crisis in slow motion while avoiding making commitments to the EU’s future. In order to gain ECB support they reluctantly agreed to ask Silvio Berlusconi, then Italian prime minister, to leave in 2011; and then reluctantly agreed to a new fiscal framework that they promised to enshrine in a treaty — but not just yet. They reluctantly engaged in a banking union, which they promised to complete — but not just yet. Worse than not respecting such commitments is the fact that most of southern Europe is infringing fiscal rules with the implicit blessing of the European Commission. It would have been better for the Commission, in agreement with member states, to take a stand against fiscal austerity when it was most needed — in the summer of 2014, in the wake of the speech at the central bankers’ gathering at Jackson Hole, Wyoming, in which Mario Draghi, ECB president, paved the way for a round of monetary easing. 

What is true for the eurozone is also true for the EU. Let us be honest: Europe (or, rather, its member states) is unable to cope with migrants, its youth guarantee is not creating jobs and the plan by Jean-Claude Juncker, European Commission president, to boost jobs and growth subcontracts responsibility to private sector investment. 

What happens if the UK votes to leave? European leaders should brace themselves and come up with substantive proposals. If they do not want to see the fall of Europe on their watch, they need to take some difficult decisions: they should agree to share responsibility for past mistakes while committing to establishing a European government in charge of policies of common interest to eurozone countries and accountable to a democratically elected eurozone parliament.

In short, a government of the eurozone should be made responsible for a common budget adressing cyclical turbulence as well as fundamental issues of common interest such as defence. If they do not do this, then they should at least manage the end of the European project and try to avoid handing it over to populists on a plate. 

The writer is head of AXA IM research and a former adviser to François Hollande, French president 

