Fintechs play blame game over Brexit suspensions

2016-06-23

The Brexit finger-pointing has already started between fintechs over a wave of suspensions that has rippled through the online foreign exchange sector.

Currency Cloud, a digital foreign exchange broker, has denied claims by a client that it had been forced to suspend its service because of a postponement of some electronic FX orders by Barclays, reports Martin Arnold in London.

Azimo, a digital cross-border payments upstart, told the FT that the main reason for suspending its service until after the referendum was the knock-on effect of the Barclays move on its supply of FX from Currency Cloud.

But Todd Latham, chief marketing officer and head of product at Currency Cloud, has rejected this. He said that it partly suspended its service because of the expected volatility over the referendum “to protect our customers” and not because of any change in the service from Barclays.

Currrency Cloud has told clients that it will not accept any orders that must wait to be settled until Friday – by which time the outcome of the Brexit vote will be known. But he said that other types of orders were being accepted as usual.

Mr Latham added: “We are taking a relatively conservative position. We think they [Azimo] are being extra cautious.”

Marta Krupinska, co-founder of Azimo, said earlier that its decision to suspend its service for two days was because of the impact of Barclays’ withdrawal of electronic FX stop-loss orders on Currency Cloud.

Azimo relies on Currency Cloud to convert customer orders into 80 different currencies.

Barclays told clients this week that from 7am on Thursday – when polls opened in the UK – it would transfer any electronic FX stop-loss orders to its voice brokers.

Other digital FX start-ups have also been disrupted by the UK referendum.

Transferwise, the UK-based money-transfer operator, said on Tuesday it would impose restrictions on transfers involving pounds beginning at 7am Thursday UK time until Friday when the referendum results are revealed.

