Brexit: voter turnout by age

2016-06-24

Britain has voted to leave the EU, after the Leave campaign won 51.9 per cent of votes in Thursday’s referendum.

Less than 24 hours after polls closed, the repercussions have already been enormous both in breadth and depth. British Prime Minister David Cameron announced his resignation, whilst currency markets and stock indexes the world over were thrown into chaos on Friday as the result became clear.

As polls closed on Thursday, the impression was that the result would be extremely close. This allowed both sides hope of victory, meaning many of the 16m people who voted Remain have spent much of Friday in shock, asking how this happened.

No doubt the chain of events that led to Brexit will be examined in great detail — and much anguish on the Remain side — for years to come. Rapid changes in the UK’s political climate undoubtedly played a part, and global events including the Great Recession and recent European migrant crisis have left their mark.

But for now we can focus on what we know in the immediate aftermath of the vote: the distinguishing characteristics of the areas of Britain that voted for either side.

Votes were reported in each of 382 counting areas: 382 local government districts in England, Wales and Scotland, plus Northern Ireland as a single entity and finally Gibraltar. Between the UK’s census and other official national statistics, data is available on the demographic and socio-economic characteristics of most or all of these areas, allowing us to identify common factors among regions which voted one way or the other.

Who voted which way?

Below are five of the most statistically significant of these factors. Polling ahead of the referendum had long since identified education as one of the fundamental drivers of voting intention, and the demographic data shows that this was absolutely the case.

Out of more than 100 key social characteristics, the percentage of people with a degree was the most strongly associated with the share of voters who voted Remain. Unsurprisingly, the proportion of people in jobs classified as “professional occupations” — generally requiring a degree equivalent qualification — was the next strongest.

In the recent London Mayoral Election, we carried out a similar analysis and found that areas where many people did not hold a passport — indicating they would not have been abroad recently — tended to yield high votes for the far-right Britain First party.

The same pattern emerges here. After education and occupation, the share of people not holding a passport was the next most strongly correlated characteristic with the Leave vote. It may simply be a statistical quirk that sees the same statistic emerge as a strong indicator of both support for Britain First and the Leave campaign, but it may also be that we’re seeing proxy evidence of the nationalist theme that has been identified in some of Leave’s campaigning.

These three are by some way the strongest associations with the pattern of the result across the country, but two more patterns are also worth mentioning. First, earnings. Before the vote several polls identified a common finding: people intending to vote Leave were much more likely than Remain voters to say they felt Britain’s economy was either stagnant or in decline.

This speaks to the widening rift in British society that many have touted as one of the key shifts that prepared the ground for Brexit. Earnings data shows that there may be some truth in this: areas with higher median incomes tended to lean Remain, whilst lower incomes leaned Leave.

And finally, age. The generational divide on Brexit has been common knowledge throughout the campaign, and is apparent in the demographic data, even if only weakly. Had turnout been higher among younger people its influence would have been even greater, but as is usually the case, there was a slight general trend for turnout to increase in line with average age.

The regional divide

Leave won the day by more than one million votes, which makes the predominantly Remain regions notable. In every one of Scotland’s 32 council areas more than 50 per cent of the vote went to Remain, and the overall split was 62-38. London was almost as firmly Remain, voting 60-40 overall, with Remain majorities in 28 of its 33 boroughs. But a closer look at the education chart from earlier shows that the ways in which the two voted Remain are quite different.

London’s boroughs slot fairly nicely into the national pattern: more education was associated with a lower Leave vote, and the Leave vote for any given level percentage of degree-educated people was broadly in line with the national trend. What makes London a Remain stronghold is its high education levels.

But in Scotland, whilst the general pattern of more education coinciding with less Leave votes held true, the whole cluster is shifted downwards away from the overall trendline: the same level of education in Scotland yields a higher Remain vote than it would elsewhere in the UK, showing that the Scots were more naturally inclined to vote Remain, regardless of education levels.

Will Leave rue their decision?

Ten days before the referendum, the Centre for European Reform think tank published a report asking whether Leave voters may be “Brexiting [themselves] in the foot”. One of the core points was that the parts of the UK which rely the most heavily on the EU for exports were predicted to be the most anti-EU, based on analysis of the British Election Survey by academics Nick Vivyan and Chris Hanretty.

Today we reproduced the chart using the actual results rather than the projections, and the pattern holds. On average, the higher the percentage of a region’s economic output that is currently exported to the EU, the higher its Leave vote turned out to be.

Follow John Burn-Murdoch

