Automaker shares slump amid Brexit uncertainty

2016-06-24

Shares in international car makers with manufacturing plants in the UK have fallen sharply in the wake of the UK’s decision to leave the EU.

Nissan, Honda, Toyota and BMW all dropped, as the world’s largest automakers face the decision of whether to maintain their current levels of investment in Britain, writes Peter Campbell, Motor Industry Correspondent.

Ford and General Motors’s Vauxhall division also have major capacity in the UK, though their shares are listed in the US.

Jaguar Land Rover, Britain’s largest car maker producing more than 500,000 vehicles a year, is not a listed company as it is owned by Tata Motors in India.

Shares in Nissan, Honda and Toyota, which between them make 800,000 cars were all down 7 per cent in Tokyo.

The UK’s car industry made 1.6m vehicles last year, its best year in a decade, setting it on course to produce a record number by the end of the decade.

But analysts have warned that demand for new cars in the UK will fall by a fifth if the country enters a recession.

Appetite for new cars falls by 20 per cent in a “typical” downturn, Stuart Pearson, an analyst at Exane BNP Paribas, wrote in an early morning note to clients on Friday.

Some 80 per cent of the cars that roll off UK lines are destined for export, with more than half of those sold to the EU.

Although all of the car makers confirmed their commitment to the UK in the run up to the vote, a number have warned that leaving the EU would make their British plants less competitive when tendering for new work.

Industry body the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders has warned that remaining in the EU is “critical to the future of the UK automotive industry”.

The sector supports 800,000 jobs and contributes £15.5bn to the economy, according to the latest figures.

Car makers that sell into the UK will also face an impact, one analyst said.

Mr Pearson from Exane BNP Paribas noted that 13 per cent of Peugeot’s sales are into the UK, and the French car maker is the most heavily exposed listed manufacturer to the pound.

BMW has 12 per cent of its sales in the UK, he added.

The European car market, which had been growing steadily following fallow years after the financial crash, is also expected to be hit, he said.

