Stocks lack trend at end of volatile week

2016-06-17

Friday 21:00 BST. US and European stocks moved in opposite directions at the end of an extremely volatile week in which the possibility of the UK voting to quit the European Union dominated market action.

The strong demand for government bonds seen earlier this week — which drove benchmark yields in several nations to record lows — showed signs of abating, while the dollar steadied against the yen after sliding to a two-year low on Thursday.

Dollar/yen had come under pressure from the combination of a relatively dovish statement from the Federal Reserve and a lack of fresh stimulus measures from the Bank of Japan following policy meetings by both central banks.

Tellingly, the BoJ — as well as the Swiss National Bank after its policy meeting on Thursday — explicitly referred to the potential for next week’s referendum in the UK to fuel fresh uncertainty and turbulence. 

The Bank of England went further, reiterating that the vote was the biggest immediate risk to UK markets, and “possibly also global financial markets”.

The heightened tensions this week came as opinion polls repeatedly indicated that momentum was shifting towards the “leave” campaign. 

“The last six polls have put ‘leave’ ahead, two by as much as 7 percentage points,” noted Oliver Jones at Capital Economics.

“Nonetheless, while betting odds have shifted some way in response to the swing in the opinion polls, it’s notable that betting markets still consider a vote to remain nearly twice as likely.”

But the opinion polls were sufficient to set off alarm bells across the globe. Perhaps most notably, demand for German government bonds — regarded by many as the “safest of havens” — pushed the yield on the 10-year Bund into negative territory for the first time.

On Friday, the yield was back at plus 0.02 per cent, up 4 basis points on the day, and flat on the week. Ten-year sovereign yields in the UK and Japan also touched record lows before recovering slightly on Friday.

In the US, the 10-year Treasury yield touched 1.518 per cent on Thursday — the lowest in nearly four years— before pulling back up on Friday to 1.61 per cent, up 5bp on the day and 3bp down over the week.

The policy-sensitive US two-year yield bounced off a four-month low of 0.65 per cent to end the week at 0.70 per cent — up 2bp on the day but 4bp down over the week.

The moves the Treasury market reflected a further pushing back of US interest rate expectations, after the Fed left borrowing costs unchanged as it acknowledged a slowdown in the pace of job creation.

“The Fed signalled a wait-and-see stance at this week’s meeting,” said analysts at Danske Bank.

“Uncertainty over the UK EU vote and softer job growth have made the Fed more cautious and it needs more assurance that the US economy is recovering as expected before pulling the trigger again.”

Although the Fed’s median forecast for two interest rate rises by the end of the year was left unchanged, its “dot-plot” projections showed that six out of 17 Open Market Committee members saw only one increase in 2016.

Furthermore, it scaled back its forecasts for rates in 2017 and 2018.

The central bank’s dovish stance weighed broadly on the dollar, a trend that continued on Friday. The dollar index, a measure of the currency against a basket of peers, was down 0.4 per cent, leaving it also 0.4 per cent softer on the week.

The euro was up 0.5 per cent on Friday at $1.1281 while dollar/yen was little changed at ¥104.20 — a day after it touched ¥103.58, the lowest since September 2014.

Sterling, unsurprisingly, saw some extremely sharp swings this week — moving between $1.4010 and $1.4387 — as participants viewed the currency through the “Brexit” prism.

Equities also had a choppy week. In New York, the S&P 500 steadily eased back from the 2016 intraday high hit on June 8, shedding another 0.3 per cent to 2,071 on Friday. It fell 1.2 per cent over the five-day period.

Apple was a drag on the index as the stock fell more than 2 per cent.

The pan-European Stoxx 600 index, by contrast, rose 1.4 per cent on Friday although it too was down — by 2.1 per cent — over the week.

The oil price remained a key driver of stock market sentiment. Brent, the international crude benchmark, rallied 4.2 per cent on Friday — helped by the softer dollar — to settle at $49.17 a barrel, after six straight days of declines. It was down 2.7 per cent over the week.

Gold had a more volatile ride this week, touching a two-year high of $1,315 an ounce on Thursday before retreating sharply. On Friday, the metal traded at $1,297, up $19 on the day and $23 on the week.

