Brexit: UK voters may soon come to miss a humiliated Cameron

2016-06-24

Years will pass before Britain finds out in detail what it has done. Thursday’s popular rejection of EU membership is too large and unprecedented an event for it to unfold in a predictable manner. Those of us who failed to see it coming should check ourselves before mapping out its implications with any precision. 

Even the most immediate and obvious of these, however, add up to a rupture in national life. David Cameron’s authority as prime minister is over, even though his physical departure from office will not take place until the autumn. Little more than a year since the renewal of his electoral mandate, he must prepare for a transfer of power to, most likely, Boris Johnson, the former London mayor, after a Conservative party leadership race. 

He must also prepare to be remembered for inadvertently presiding over the end of his country’s 43-year place in the European project — and for nothing else. Since Anthony Eden launched a botched military intervention in the Suez Canal 60 years ago, there has been no greater prime ministerial humiliation.

Equally plain is that his successor will take over a culturally riven country, a precarious economy, pressure for a snap election, a diplomatic wrangle with Brussels over the terms of extrication and, potentially, another effort by Scottish nationalists to withdraw their pro-European nation from the UK. So much has ended and so much has begun. 

That culture gap is what grabs the eye as the results are pored over. Britain, it was easy to think until now, is divided only in the way that any complicated democratic society is divided. It is not as if France or America are lands of immaculate harmony. But the numbers suggest something very particular here. Although they are at opposite ends of the country, London and Scotland appear to share a sensibility — internationalist, anticonservative if not anti-Conservative — that fares badly in much of the space in between. There was lots of glib talk among politicians on Friday morning concerning the urgent need to bring the country together. It is hard to see what platform of policies, under which national leader, could possibly achieve this. 

It is also difficult to imagine anything approaching stability — Britain’s historic offering to investors, in the absence of exceptional productivity or infrastructure — in the next few years. The country had deficits in the current account and the government budget even before the chill put on economic sentiment by the mere prospect of EU exit. Sterling’s plunge is a glimpse of what the reality of exit may bring. Mr Cameron resigned to the boast that Britain’s economy was “fundamentally strong”. His proposition will be tested. 

What was your initial feeling after you heard the results? What questions do you have now? Share your thoughts with the FT community here.

This is always said of outgoing prime ministers but voters may have occasion to miss him before long. The Leavers turned out to be sensationally good campaigners but they are no more unified in their vision of what a sovereign Britain should look like than they were before Thursday’s vote. The ideological distance between the liberal traders — Mr Johnson, for instance — and the nostalgic supporters of the UK Independence party is unbridgeable. As a droll irony, it rather resembles the mutual cultural incomprehension between Labour’s leadership and its base. 

Before the future does what it does, pro-Europeans face the work of postmortem. It is less complicated than it sounds. This result flowed from the public’s exasperation with the free movement of people. Other grievances — with elites, with markets — exercised voters but they all converged on the subject of immigration. June 23 was a reckoning that has been on the way since 2004, when Britain opened itself to workers from the central and eastern European countries that had just joined the EU. 

For every voter who welcomed the economic and cultural invigoration, many, many more resented the pace of change. The feeling was intense among Labour voters, whose cultural estrangement from their party in the north of England is shocking to observe. 

Had Mr Cameron secured a substantial reform of free movement, Britain would have stayed. The paucity of his renegotiation this year was what told in the end. 

It also means that expectations have been set at a great height. Having voted for a prospectus to cut immigration drastically, Britain will expect no less. How the next prime minister achieves this without a damaging exit from the single market, and while containing centrifugal pressures from Scotland, is the story of the coming years. Failure would leave an already seething electorate even more cynical. Before long, the government will envy the opposition. 

janan.ganesh@ft.com

