Asia’s central bankers talk tough amid market volatility

2016-06-24

While all eyes are turned to Tokyo on expectations of possible monetary intervention, central banks throughout the Asia Pacific region have held press conferences and issued statements asserting strength in the face of intense market volatility following the UK’s vote to exit the EU.

The Hong Kong Monetary Authority’s chief executive Norman Chan [pictured] said on Friday the financial centre remained “highly liquid” and “robust”. Mr Chan said that while financial markets had reacted to the Leave vote with “notable volatility,” Hong Kong’s trade flows had remained stable and trade in offshore renminbi was “functioning smoothly.”

Those and other comments from central bankers in the region came as markets around the world struggled to digest the consequences of the UK’s decision to leave the EU, write Hudson Lockett in Hong Kong, Jeevan Vasagar in Singapore, Song Jung-a in Seoul and Simon Mundy in Mumbai.

Hong Kong’s benchmark Hang Seng Index closed the day down 2.92 per cent, while the China-focused CSI 300 had ended the trading day down only 1.29 per cent; the Kospi had closed the trading day down 3.09 per cent; and the benchmark FTSE Straits Times Index was down 2.3 per cent in afternoon trading.

“In the coming months the UK will negotiate a prosperous arrangement for leaving the EU,” Mr Chan told reporters at an HKMA press conference announced late in the trading day and which ended abruptly after roughly five minutes and a terse Q&A session.

Asked whether the market impact of the vote was likely to go beyond the short-lived impact he had previously predicted it could have for Hong Kong’s capital and stock markets, Mr Chan said it was “hard to tell,” because markets for the most part had expected a win for the Remain camp.

Also late in the afternoon, the Reserve Bank of India issued a statement that confirmed an intervention without providing much detail, stating it was “continuously maintaining a close vigil on the market developments, both domestically and internationally, and will take all necessary steps, including providing liquidity support (both dollar and INR), to ensure orderly conditions in financial markets.”

In South Korea, Seoul’s vice finance minister Choi Sang-mok told reporters on Friday the government was considering fresh currency swap arrangements to stabilise financial markets. He added that South Korea would expand international cooperation with the G20 and neighbouring countries such as Japan and China for financial stability, following the Brexit referendum.

South Korean officials said the impact of Brexit on the Korean economy would be limited, given the relatively small volume of bilateral trade with the UK. But Seoul’s foreign minister Yun Byung-se told a parliamentary committee on Friday that South Korea is willing to consider a bilateral trade agreement with the UK, as the European country will drop out of the free trade agreement signed between the EU and South Korea, which took effect in 2011.

Meanwhile, the Monetary Authority of Singapore said it had been in “close contact” with foreign central banks and regulators ahead of the UK referendum.

The Singapore central bank said in a statement after the UK vote: “MAS will provide additional liquidity to the banking system if needed… MAS will continue to be vigilant and stay in close contact with fellow central banks and regulators, as uncertainty is likely to persist following the referendum outcome.”

The MAS said the Singapore dollar remained within its policy band despite heightened volatility in forex markets. Singapore’s central bank manages inflation through the exchange rate rather than by controlling interest rates.

