Merkel warns politicians against inflaming hatred

2016-06-17

Angela Merkel on Friday warned that the killing of British MP Jo Cox should serve as a stark reminder to politicians to avoid inflammatory language. 

“This is a terrible precedent,” said the German chancellor. “The overall lesson must be that we behave with respect to each other, including when we have different political beliefs . . . Otherwise radicalisation will definitely not be stopped.” 

Ms Merkel’s unusually forthright words came as news of the killing reverberated around Europe, prompting expressions of shock, regret and alarm. French president François Hollande tweeted his condolences, saying “I express my deep emotion after the murder of Jo Cox.” 

There was general disbelief that such a killing could happen in Britain, seen on the continent as a model of democracy and political fair play. Speaking in Luxembourg, where finance ministers observed a minute’s silence at a Eurogroup meeting, Dutch finance minister Jeroen Dijsselbloem said: “The UK is a beacon for peaceful politics and we hope that the British public . . . can make their democratic choices serenely and in a safe way next week.” 

German politicians in particular are linking Ms Cox’s killing to wider fears of rising intolerance, especially among rightwing groups hostile to foreigners and immigration. 

Cologne’s mayor, who was herself stabbed last year by an attacker protesting against immigration, said on Twitter: “Xenophobic words lead inevitably to violence. We all bear responsibility that in Germany and in Europe things never go this far again.” 

Henriette Reker, a former head of Cologne’s refugee services, was assaulted on the day before she was elected mayor by a man who was heard to protest about refugee inflows during the attack. Her 44-year-old assailant is on trial for attempted murder.

Karl-Georg Wellmann, a leading MP in Ms Merkel’s CDU party, pointed at leading Brexit campaigner Boris Johnson. He told German radio: “When an English politician, especially a conservative politician like Boris Johnson, compares the EU with Adolf Hitler, we should not wonder when some madmen take the law into their own hands.” 

Mr Wellman drew parallels with radicalisation in Germany, accusing “ratcatchers”, such as Alexander Gauland, a leader in the rightwing Alternative for Germany, of fomenting trouble. 

Critics of the Brexit campaign seized on the killing to attack the Brexiters. In France, Marion Van Renterghem, a reporter at Le Monde, the daily paper, tweeted: “The lovely face of Jo Cox will become the symbol of an absurd and suicidal referendum.” 

Anti-EU politicians expressed concern at the possible damage done to their cause if Ms Cox’s death now rallies support for the Remain campaign that she backed. 

In Italy, Matteo Salvini, leader of the Northern League, which has grown into the third-strongest party on an anti-EU, anti-immigration platform, said he felt “pain” at the murder of an “innocent mother” by a “crazy assassin”. He added that he hoped her death would not stop a vote by the UK to free itself of the EU, “which has brought only unemployment, hunger, and immigration”. 

Il Giornale, an Italian rightwing anti-EU newspaper, spoke bluntly of the bullets fired at Ms Cox as “the three gunshots at a woman that saved Europe”. 

However, Sweden and the Netherlands, two countries with recent political murders, offer contrasting lessons about the chances of a surge of support for the victim’s cause. 

Referendum campaigning suspended after fatal attack on politician

Pim Fortuyn, the charismatic Dutch anti-Islam politician, was killed nine days before a general election in 2002. The Pim Fortuyn List party went on to win 17 per cent of the parliamentary seats, an unprecedented triumph for a new party. While the grouping later faded, anti-Islamism has remained a potent force and the anti-immigrant PVV is today the most popular party. 

In Sweden, Anna Lindh, the late Swedish foreign minister, was killed in a Stockholm department store in 2003, just three days before the country voted in a referendum on whether to join the euro. Although Ms Lindh had backed the euro, there was no pro-euro swing. The anti-euro campaign won easily and Sweden has stayed out of the common currency. 

Annika Strom Melin, a columnist for the daily Dagens Nyheter, wrote: “Not just Sweden and the UK, but all countries holding polarising referendums, should by now have learnt what confused and dark forces come out when people think a nation’s honour and future are at stake.”

Additional reporting by Anne-Sylvanie Chassany in Paris, James Politi in Rome, Richard Milne in Oslo, Duncan Robinson in Brussels, and Vincent Boland in Dublin

