Brexit — how will pensions be affected?

2016-06-24

The UK’s historic vote to leave the EU will affect millions of pension savers and investors. 

FT Money sets out the short and longer-term effects of Brexit on pensions.

Drawdown

Investors who have their retirement funds in the stock market were urged by advisers not to panic as markets plunged following the Brexit result, shrinking the value of their portfolios. 

Over the past two years, hundreds of thousands of pension savers have shifted their money into “income drawdown” as they took advantage of new freedoms to take their pension cash as they wished.

“The key message is to do nothing unless you have to,” said Tom McPhail, head of retirement policy at Hargreaves Lansdown, the investment manager.

“We are likely to experience a period of volatility in the markets and uncertainty in the wider economy. In these conditions, acting in haste is unlikely to serve well.”

Mr McPhail added that if you are years from retirement and making regular savings, “then just keep going”. 

“Falls in the market mean buying investments at a lower price,” he said.

Annuity rates

For the immediate future, experts forecast that annuity rates, which determine how much annual income savers will receive in exchange for their pension pot, will remain at their very low levels.

“Yields on gilts are already at historically low levels and may fall even further, resulting in even lower annuity rates,” warned Billy Burrows, a pension expert with William Burrows Annuities.

However, he added: “In the longer term some of the stringent EU rules on the amount of capital that insurers have to hold to support their annuity may be relaxed ever so slightly and this will be good for annuities.”

Final salary pensions 

More than 11m people have defined benefit pensions, which are linked to the financial health of the employer backing the scheme. Brexit will mean greater uncertainty for the future of these benefits, say experts.

“Defined benefit employers also have the headache of poor returns on equities, depleted fund values and higher contribution demands from pension scheme trustees,” said Marcus Fink, partner at Ashurst, a law firm.

State pensions

The future of the “triple-lock” on the state pension remains uncertain following the EU vote. 

The triple-lock guarantees that the state pension will rise by the highest of prices, average earnings or 2.5 per cent.

Before the referendum, David Cameron, prime minister, warned this “special protection” would be under threat if there were a “big black hole” in the economy following a Brexit vote.

