Leave campaign triumphs in north-east of England

2016-06-24

A strong Leave vote had been expected in the north-east of England but the scale of the support for Brexit came as a shock to politicians, pundits and the markets.

When Sunderland’s result came through — 61.3 per cent voting to quit the EU — it sent the pound into a nose dive and set the tone for much of the night’s events. While Nigel Farage had appeared to concede defeat immediately after the polls closed, Sunderland instantly reversed expectations. 

“I’m delighted, absolutely over the moon,” said Richard Elvin, a campaigner for the UK Independence party as area after area recorded big Leave wins.

Leaving aside Newcastle, where Remain had 50.7 per cent of the vote, the vote for Leave exceeded 60 per cent in Sunderland, Stockton, South Tyneside, Middlesbrough, Redcar and Hartlepool, where it was highest in the region at 69.5 per cent. North Tyneside (53.4 per cent) and Darlington (56.2 per cent) also voted Leave.

Mr Elvin, a former Ukip north-east regional chairman and secretary of its Houghton and Sunderland South branch, said his party could build on the strong Leave vote. “It will strengthen the position that there’s another party out there that is listening to the demands of ordinary hard-working people,” he said.

The perception of a loss of powers to Brussels and concerns about immigration had heavily influenced the result, as had the tenor of the Remain campaign with its dire warnings of what an EU exit would mean. “People have said, ‘we won’t be bullied’,” said Mr Elvin. He called Sunderland’s three Labour MPs “obviously out of touch with their constituents”.

Labour MPs tried to cast the outcome as an attack on Conservative austerity policies. But the results are deeply unsettling for Labour, highlighting a divide between the party and its traditional voters in what was once one of its heartlands. Whatever the eventual national outcome of the referendum, voters in the north east had shown they and Labour no longer spoke as one.

Sunderland voted to quit the EU despite its heavy dependence on inward investors, most notably the carmaker Nissan, for employment.

The vote for Britain to leave the EU will have grave consequences

The city has rebuilt its manufacturing base since the 1970s largely on inward investment; the Nissan plant is the UK’s largest car producer and has grown to become north-east England’s largest private sector employer since it chose the city as its UK manufacturing site in 1984.

It employs 6,700 people there while its supply chain employs a further 20,000 people in north-east England; a substantial number of these work in plants in Sunderland.

Nissan exports 55 per cent of its Sunderland output to EU countries, or around 250,000 Sunderland-made cars in 2015. The city is home to more than 80 overseas-owned companies employing 25,600 people.

What was your initial feeling after you heard the results? What questions do you have now? Share your thoughts with the FT community here.

Yet in voting to leave the EU by such a resounding margin, Sunderland’s voters dismissed warnings by politicians and local business leaders that a British exit from the EU could put regional jobs at risk. Nissan itself had voiced a preference for the UK to stay in Europe. “It makes most sense for jobs, trade and cost,” Nissan chairman and chief executive Carlos Ghosn said earlier this year.

Bridget Phillipson, Labour MP for Houghton and Sunderland South, said Leave’s strong performance reflected a “visceral anger” among some voters. Labour had known it would be tough in Sunderland and “the result reflects that”, she added. “Voters have felt angry, disillusioned, left behind by a government that doesn’t acknowledge the needs of our region.”

She rejected the idea that Ukip would see its hand strengthened by the result but acknowledged that Labour had to listen to people and their concerns. “The world has moved on but for many people in our city it hasn’t,” she said. Old certainties had been replaced by new insecurities, particularly in the world of work, she added.

