Chelsea landlord warns of property slowdown

2016-06-23

The Cadogan Estate, the largest landlord in the exclusive London districts of Chelsea and Knightsbridge, has warned property prices will fall after five years of double-digit growth.

The 300-year-old estate owned by family of the Earl Cadogan, whose portfolio reached a record £5.8bn in gross value during 2015, said it was “easy to identify potential headwinds which will make progress difficult in 2016 and beyond”.

“The very strong performance isn’t going to continue forever,” said Hugh Seaborn, chief executive. “The downward trend in yields has got to reverse and that will put downward pressure on property values.” 

The warning echoes comments by the £6.7bn Grosvenor Estate, another of London’s main landed estates, which said earlier this year it was preparing for a price correction.

The sober outlook follows five years of fast rising prices in central London: the Cadogan estate, which owns 93 acres in London’s most upmarket districts, has generated average total returns of 19.1 per cent in each of the past five years.

“Even without the current uncertainty, the economic outlook appears more challenging than in the recent past, with the government still wrestling with the challenges of containing public expenditure and the threat of deflationary pressures in much of the world economy,” said Viscount Chelsea, the Earl Cadogan’s son, who chairs the estate.

The company warned of the “threat to economic confidence” caused by Thursday’s referendum on EU membership, but added that it otherwise saw no obvious catalyst for a sudden property market drop, instead forecasting a more gradual reversal.

The estate has so far escaped a global slowdown in luxury retail, the key business in areas it owns such as Sloane Street. But it has slowed down new acquisitions in retail property after buying more than £100m of retail sites in three years.

It said it had succeeded in luring more visitors to its streets partly through measures such as dedicated feeds on the Chinese social networks Weibo and Wechat, while it has also launched a concierge service to enable people who live and work on its estates to order services from laundry to private jets.

Price indices have presented wildly contrasting pictures of the health of the housing market — according to some the boom is back, while to others the slump staggers on

The estate’s residential portfolio fared less well: values were almost flat, helping push down its overall pre-tax profit 3.1 per cent to £650.6m, with Mr Seaborn predicting that the market would remain “quiet” in the short term.

While high-end residential prices have been falling since 2014, the remainder of the London property market has so far continued rising, despite a hiatus in transactions ahead of the referendum.

On the eve of the vote on EU membership, Mr Seaborn said it was hard to predict the impact of Brexit on the property market, but added: “Our future prosperity is closely connected to that of London. If there is anything that diminishes London or removes it from its top slot as an international centre, that will weaken the London economy and therefore be averse to our interests.”

