UK decision to go could bring Brussels fudge into play

2016-06-22

If Britain votes to leave and a divorce unfolds over years, the fudge, the solution Brussels favours for big political setbacks, cannot be ruled out, say seasoned European officials.

Britain’s referendum on Thursday is the most momentous of more than 50 binary votes that have punctuated the past four decades of EU expansion and integration. 

Nifty diplomatic footwork, however, ensured that negative plebiscites in Greece, Ireland, Denmark and France, though billed as definitive public verdicts, were not the final word. 

In public EU leaders are making clear Britain’s vote, an in-out question on membership, is different. David Cameron stresses it is “irreversible”, Matteo Renzi of Italy says it is “forever”. Jean-Claude Juncker, the European Commission president, told Britain on the eve of the vote that “out is out”. “There will be no kind of renegotiation,” he said. 

But some are more sceptical and think there could be a route back — even after several years of divorce talks. 

“One has to be cautious. First reactions can be different from how things will evolve months and years from now,” said one of the EU’s most experienced diplomats, who declined to be named because of the sensitivity of the issue. “We would be happy to find a way out of the corner that the British have led us into.”

Another veteran EU official echoed the view. “Over time, elections will come, governments will change, the issues will develop in ways we cannot predict. You would be brave to make any prediction in these volatile circumstances but you can be sure there will be no simple, neat, linear path [to divorce].” 

Although the idea has been floated by Brexiters such as Boris Johnson, there is no appetite in Berlin, Paris or Brussels for a big offer after a Brexit vote, with the aim of keeping Britain inside the union on more favourable terms. 

Indeed the internal debate is swinging towards those in Paris and the commission who want a firm message sent on the necessity of an orderly and timely break-up— if only to discourage anti-EU forces in France, the Netherlands, Denmark and Italy. 

This would make clear to Brexiters, for instance, that the so-called Article 50 exit clause in the EU treaty is the only way out of the union. 

“We will probably say: we will continue and you can leave in peace,” said Jean-Claude Piris, former head of the European Council legal service. “We have our limits. It is not a question of being nice or not.”

Those who think a compromise is possible reckon it will be the product of adversity years down the line. Political calculations may change dramatically as the complexity of unwinding 40 years of membership becomes clear, divisions over the deal plague Westminster, and the EU is hobbled by differences over how punitive or generous a UK trade deal should be. 

If there is political will, some lawyers even argue a decision to invoke Article 50 could be reversed at a later stage, so the attempt at divorce would become a form of trial separation. 

How any break-up is carried out will have a decisive impact on Britain for generations

“There is that flexibility,” said the former EU diplomat. “The burden of proof will be on the UK government — they are the ones that must disregard the Brexit vote, perhaps after a new referendum or general election.” One EU foreign minister said: “It is up to the British to interpret their own referendum.”

The big obstacle to any deal is the right of free movement. In the event of a Brexit vote, Westminster will see it as a demand for immigration reform that cannot be ignored. 

But serious restrictions would be vehemently opposed by eastern European countries that see it as one of the EU’s most important benefits and EU leaders who worry that making exceptions would encourage populists and reward referendum blackmail. 

“If the bottom line is the British people want us to tightly control immigration, the only way is to leave the single market,” said one senior British official.

————————-

UK’s EU referendum: full coverage and analysis

View the FT’s comprehensive guide to the vote on whether Britain should stay in Europe, with all the latest news, analysis and commentary from both sides of the debate. See more 

————————-

