Brussels staffers ‘shell-shocked’ and in limbo over referendum result

2016-06-24

On Thursday night, British diplomatic officials gathered at their embassy to the EU in Brussels to watch what at first appeared to be a slim but decisive referendum victory for the Remain camp. But as the results rolled in the mood changed and the tears started.

A few hundred metres away, some British staff at the headquarters of the European Commission, the bloc’s executive arm, also sobbed after it became clear that their country was set to leave the EU. The distress went far beyond employees from the UK. “There’s one winner today — and that’s Kleenex,” one official said.

For Brussels diplomats from across the whole spectrum of EU countries, the referendum result was, at best, a profound shock and, at worst, traumatic. For non-British MEPs, reactions varied from profound disappointment to a sad sense of closure on a decades-old debate. 

“We’ve all woken up to hear news we didn’t want to hear,” a senior official in the European Parliament said in an email to his team. “The United Kingdom’s departure from our European Union — an improbable prospect only a few months ago ­— will happen.” 

The official also urged his team to “rise above the natural inclination to chastise the UK”, saying that they should overcome their “own disappointment and doubts, our sense of having been unfairly snubbed, and work to sustain the relationship”.

A message written in paper cut-outs saying “we will miss you!” was plastered across office windows on two floors of the parliament’s headquarters.

There’s one winner today — and that’s Kleenex

Many British employees at EU institutions in Brussels now feel that they are in a strange limbo; they are still EU civil servants, but they suddenly have an uncertain future. The tough reactions from EU leaders on Friday, insisting that the UK must now move quickly towards the exit door , have further magnified that unease.

The sense of confusion was only marginally eased by a commitment from Jean-Claude Juncker, president of the commission, to do everything in his power to help British employees “in this difficult process”.

Mr Juncker wrote in an email to all commission staff on Friday: “I know you all have legitimate expectations about your rights and duties, your families who might have followed you to Brussels and your children who might be enrolled in schools here.” 

When Mr Juncker was asked by the BBC whether Britain’s exit would trigger the end of the EU, he responded with one word — “No” — before walking away. Commission officials at the edge of a jam-packed press room led a sustained round of applause. 

Attitudes among the EU’s elite had quickly hardened on Friday after David Cameron, Britain’s prime minister, said in his resignation statement that Brussels would have to wait until October for exit negotiations to begin. 

How any break-up is carried out will have a decisive impact on Britain for generations

A joint statement from the presidents of the EU’s institutions was redrafted following these remarks, in order to demand that Mr Cameron trigger negotiations “as soon as possible, however painful that process may be”.

Throughout Friday morning, resignation and defiance set in amongofficials from several countries who were trying to make sense of what had happened — the words “stunned” and “shell-shocked” came up repeatedly. One tearful commission official blamed the result on the British media.

But one staffer noted wryly that, the further south in Europe an MEP was from, the more positive their reactions seemed to be about Britain leaving; a reflection of northern Europe’s appreciation for Britain’s commitment to open markets, liberal economics and suspicion of grand centralising projects.

The result sparked a mixture of glee and surprise at a breakfast hosted by the European Parliament’s ECR group, to which the UK’s Conservative MEPs belong. Many Tory MEPs had campaigned for Leave but few expected success.

Early on Friday, Syed Kamall, the most senior elected British official in Brussels, and a leading proponent of Brexit, stood in an underpass near the EU institutions talking into his mobile phone. Although he had campaigned for Leave, the MEP was still shocked: “I believed the polls,” he said.

————————-

Brexit? In or Out

What a British divorce from the EU would look likeHow any break-up is carried out will have a huge impact on Britain for generationsThe economic consequences of BrexitThree very different outcomes of a British vote to leave the EUWhat would Brexit mean for the City of London?There is a clear split over how a vote to leave would shape the capital’s future as a financial centreWhat the City stands to lose and gain from BrexitSectors such as foreign exchange trading have boomed during EU yearsWhat has the EU done for the UK?The long-running debate over the economic benefits of membership remains unresolved

————————-

