ECB heads to meet to develop post-Brexit strategy

2016-06-20

The European Central Bank’s executive board will meet on Tuesday to discuss how to ensure that a possible British exit from the EU would not snuff out the eurozone’s tentative economic recovery.

The ECB believes it has the tools to weather the immediate aftermath of a Brexit and ensuing global market turmoil. 

Its real worry is longer term: that a British departure from the EU, the biggest setback to the bloc since its founding 60 years ago, would not only eliminate any appetite for further integration of the eurozone but could unleash political forces that led to the EU’s disintegration. 

“To lose the second-largest economy [in the EU] seems almost certain to intensify the opposition to the eurozone that we’ve seen in half a dozen countries . . . There’s no way to approach Brexit other than as first order crisis for the EU,” said Robert Shapiro, chair of Sonecon, a US consultancy on public policy. “Anyone who thinks Brexit represents a bump in a road doesn’t understand the politics or the economics. It’s not a bump in the road, it’s a new road.”

The ECB and other major central banks combined forces during the worst of the global financial turmoil to set up a network of swap lines, where their currency is available to banks across borders and time zones. After years of crisis management and conversations between ECB supervisors and the biggest lenders in the region, officials think the infrastructure is in place to deal with any shortages of euro liquidity. 

The ECB has a swap line with the Bank of England, allowing UK banks to access euros, and has a longstanding pledge to provide unlimited amounts of euros to banks within the single currency area — as long as lenders have collateral to back up the loans. 

Anyone who thinks Brexit represents a bump in a road doesn’t understand the politics or the economics. It’s not a bump in the road, it’s a new road

The ECB can call an emergency meeting of its governing council, composed of its top six executive board officials and the heads of the region’s national central banks, and make a statement to reiterate the auctions of central bank cash already in place. 

A collapse in confidence is not in policymakers’ baseline scenario, and Mario Draghi, ECB president, has said his central bank can unleash more stimulus if borrowing costs for the region’s governments and citizens unexpectedly soar. 

The bigger concern for Mr Draghi, who will explain his thinking before the European Parliament on Tuesday, is that a British exit would fuel Euroscepticism across the continent making it harder to complete the fiscal and financial integration necessary to make the euro more sustainable. 

EU officials are split on how to proceed. Wolfgang Schäuble, German finance minister, has said that it would be “crazy” to respond to a British Leave vote with more integration.

Fears about future cohesion of the eurozone are already showing up on its periphery.

[If I was Mr Draghi, I would] prepare a series of measures that would back up a public commitment to the stability of sovereign debt markets in Italy and Spain,” Mr Shapiro said.

————————-

UK’s EU Referendum: How people would vote

For a more detailed summary of opinion polling visit the FT’s Brexit poll tracker page

————————-

While demand for haven assets pulled Germany’s borrowing rate to a new low last week, credit and equity markets in Portugal, Italy, Greece and Spain sold off as the odds of Brexit rose in recent weeks. The premium demanded by investors to hold peripheral bonds instead of safer German securities reached the highest level since February, undoing a rally driven by the ECB’s aggressive easing. 

The ECB could hit back against soaring government borrowing costs through its crisis fighting Outright Monetary Transactions programme, under which it can buy sovereign debt — in theory, in unlimited amounts. 

News, comment and analysis on the referendum to decide whether Britain will leave the EU.

Mr Draghi also signalled that the ECB will act against a less dramatic, “unwarranted” rise in borrowing costs by expanding the quantitative easing package. At the moment, the central bank is buying €80bn-worth of mostly government bonds each month. It intends to do so at least until March 2017 to raise inflation towards its target of just under 2 per cent. 

However, there are concerns QE could not cure uncertainty induced by political uncertainty. With a lack of clarity about what the EU will look like years from now, confidence could disappear no matter what the central bank does. 

“Markets can become binary. If investors start thinking there is less commitment in the EU, then the ECB cannot be expected to buy everything,” said Laurence Boone, chief economist at AXA. “If there is a perception of weakness, markets will need a political statement of intent from Germany and France.”

Additional reporting by Elaine Moore. 

