Oil stages ‘relief rally’ on early UK poll

2016-06-23

A relief rally lifted oil prices in the wake of a YouGov poll showing a lead for a Remain vote in the UK referendum, but gold barely moved with yellow metal having priced in the possibility that the UK would stay in the EU.

Brent rallied to a two-week high of $51.15 a barrel on Thursday evening in London, up 2.6 per cent on the day or $1.2. 

With the forecasts before polling day on a knife edge, some traders had feared a Leave vote would trigger a sharp sell-off, taking Brent to $45 a barrel. However, hopes for a vote for Remain triggered a “relief rally”, said Amrita Sen, chief strategist at consultants Energy Aspects.

The YouGov data which showed that 52 per cent of those surveyed chose Remain compared to 48 per cent Leave, came immediately after the polls were closed, is not the final result and is being taken with caution. 

But while uncertainty surrounding the UK referendum and the possible effects on the British and European economies had weighed on sentiment, “a Remain vote could see risk-on trades being put back on,” said Ms Sen.

WTI was trading slightly higher at $50.35 a barrel.

Gold hardly reacted to the YouGov poll, and retreated 0.3 per cent to $1,251.21 a troy ounce after it was announced. 

The yellow metal is down almost 5 per cent from its high this year of $1,315.55, hit last week. Investors sought out gold, regarded as a haven asset, as fears of the UK voting to leave the EU heightened alongside swirling uncertainty about the prospects of US interest rates.

But analysts said that a vote to remain in the EU was now largely priced in. “The downside risk for gold should be limited,” said Commerzbank.

Even if the UK votes to remain, there may be some short-term volatility in the gold markets as traders and investors adjust positions, predicted some analysts. 

But after the dust settles, gold is likely to be supported around the $1,245 level, said Ole Hansen, head of commodity strategy at Saxo Bank. He added: “On the other side of the vote, the focus should fairly quickly return to the multiple supports coming from a dovish Fed, the diversification/ reallocation negative sovereign bond yields and concerns about global growth.”

