Brussels briefing: Staying Super

2016-06-22

As everyone who has played the famous video game knows, Super Mario is not always super. Temporarily able to boost his size and powers, he is nevertheless, for much of the time, just regular Mario.

What to make then of ECB president Mario Draghi? The eurozone crisis has seen the ECB repeatedly expand its operations in its bid to stimulate the euro area economy. As Mr Draghi has repeatedly said, these “extraordinary measures” were meant to provide a temporary breathing space for governments. Instead, politicians have proved all too willing to let the ECB permanently shoulder the load.

In a hearing before the European Parliament yesterday, Mr Draghi cut a frustrated figure as he set out the steps nations need to take to finish building their “incomplete” and “still fragile” monetary union, and to make their economies more competitive.

They include labour market reforms, increased “financial risk sharing,” removing barriers to cross-border flows of capital and creating “a shock absorption mechanism” – essentially a centralised investment fund to pump money into the economy during a downturn.

The scorecard Mr Draghi gave was not flattering. Progress on the euro area’s flagship “banking union” programme to pool responsibility for the financial system had “ground to a halt,” he said. The pace of structural reforms to labour markets, meanwhile, has been “by and large, recently unsatisfactory.”

In the meantime, the ECB has been forced to keep flooding the financial system with cheap money. The central bank expanded its quantitative easing programme in March. It has also said it will buy high-grade corporate debt and effectively subsidise bank lending by paying lenders to make business loans through a series of auctions. And it is preparing for “all possible contingencies” if Brexit comes.

Mr Draghi’s dilemma is that the only way to change the rules of this dispiriting game is to refuse to play anymore – effectively to plunge Europe back into the crisis in order to force governments to finally solve it. An impossible choice.

Rather than Super Mario, another alter ego might be more appropriate: to borrow the name of his home country’s recently instituted bank rescue fund, Mr Draghi has become Atlas – condemned to hold up the world until someone else volunteers to share the burden.

But in the case of poor Atlas, even Hercules couldn’t be convinced to take over.

