Brexit means a bumpy road ahead for the UK economy

2016-06-24

The economists’ nightmare has happened: Britain has voted to leave the EU. Numerous economic warnings on the costs of Brexit are for the past; Britain is now embarking on precisely the path recommended by almost no reputable experts.

The public’s decision raises important questions over financial stability, spending and jobs over the coming year, and the difficult transition to a new settlement of trading relationships both with our closest economic partners and the rest of the world.

The precipitous drop in sterling as the strong Leave vote became clearer signals the turmoil in financial markets ahead. No one should underestimate the potential difficulties given the UK’s heavy reliance on borrowing from abroad to finance its spending.

It will be for Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of England, a man so traduced by the Leave campaign, to save the day. He can be expected to make a statement saying the BoE will do everything in its power to ensure banks have sufficient funds to function and keep the wheels of finance turning in the days ahead.

In the next few weeks, we can expect companies and households to refrain from making big spending decisions as they wait for some of the fog caused by market turmoil and Britain’s new status in the world to clear. Demand will be weaker than hoped, perhaps significantly so and with a vicious drop in sterling, prices will be higher, further squeezing household incomes through higher import prices.

Frankly, the BoE can do little to mitigate this pain. A cut in interest rates — likely to come in August — from the current rate of 0.5 per cent will be too small and will take too long before it has any effect. Britain has few defences against a recession; it must just hope people keep on spending regardless.

The victorious Leave campaign, which fought without a plan for Britain’s place in the world after Brexit, will now own the result. Since George Osborne thinks such a policy is “economically illiterate”, he cannot have any credibility if he tries to stay in his post.

The least damage to Britain’s economy will come if the UK maintains as many ties as possible with the EU, preferably by remaining a member of the European Economic Area. But since the so-called “Norway” option requires freedom of movement of people and payments into the EU budget, it is not a likely outcome — it would run counter to Leave’s entire winning strategy.

What was your initial feeling after you heard the results? What questions do you have now? Share your thoughts with the FT community here.

The new chancellor will have to find the most acceptable trade-off between his or her populist instincts and the price in terms of lost growth. Do not underestimate how difficult this will be. Any hit to growth of more than 0.6 per cent will leave the public finances worse off, even after the savings of the membership fee of the EU, leaving the new chancellor having to explain the world is worse than promised.

All this has to be achieved against the backdrop of an existential threat to the integrity of the UK as Scotland has voted heavily for remaining in the EU and demands for another Scottish referendum will be impossible to refuse. 

Although the promised “punishment budget” is not remotely likely in the short term, ultimately taxes are almost certainly going to have to rise and public spending fall to pay for the weaker economy that Brexit brings.

There are no free lunches. No one owes Britain an easy ride. The rest of the world will not look favourably on Britain if our decision unsettles their economies. This is a perilous time to be invested in the UK economy. 

chris.giles@ft.com

