Britain’s resident Poles concerned by repercussions of Brexit

2016-06-20

After a decade in London, home delivery driver Arkadiusz Madejski is desperate for the UK to stay in the EU — a view he shares with hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of other Poles.

Some 850,000 Poles now reside in the UK — the country’s biggest non-British population. They have become a symbol of how EU membership has changed UK society — particularly this century, with the entry of 10 generally poorer, ex-Communist states into the bloc.

But Mr Madejski’s concerns go beyond the uncertainty that both he and other Polish migrants would face if Britain votes in Thursday’s referendum to leave the bloc, depriving Poland of its main ally in Brussels on many issues. 

“Brexit is a wrong solution for the UK,” said the 32-year-old, who has lived in London for 10 years. “The economy would suffer. British people think that we, the immigrants, take their jobs but the truth is they would never work on the same conditions as I do now.”

850,000

Poles reside in the UK

A surge in anti-immigrant rhetoric has characterised the final weeks ahead of polling day, as Leave campaigners seize on the issue as a potential vote-winner. Even though such language has been toned down in recent days, after the murder last week of Jo Cox, a Labour member of parliament, many Poles are still deeply unsettled.

“We are all scared because we do not know what is going to happen,” said Karolina Kula, a 37-year-old assistant in a Polish shop in north London. “I have two children who go to school here, I have paid my taxes here — they cannot simply throw me out.”

I have two children who go to school here, I have paid my taxes here — they cannot simply throw me out

The campaign has inspired feelings of fear or uncertainty among 72 per cent of Poles living in the UK, according to a survey carried out last week by Polish pollster IBRiS. But while Poles living in Britain fret about their potential post-Brexit status, a Leave victory may have a silver lining for the Polish government. Warsaw has long tried to find ways to stem the steady flow of migrant workers to the UK and other EU member states, and tempt those living abroad to bring their skills, education and income tax payments back home.

72%

Of Poles living in the UK say the Leave campaign has made them feel scared or uncertain 

While EU citizens already living in the UK are likely to retain their right to work in the country, a decision to leave the EU would make it more difficult for new entrants, or for people who want to switch between the two countries. That could convince would-be migrants to stay and make their living at home. 

“Emigration of young Poles, the best brains in the country, is a personal trauma for me,” deputy prime minister Jaroslaw Gowin told the FT last week. “Ten per cent of all Poles have emigrated over the past few decades. That is a tremendous loss.”

A recent study suggested that 81 per cent of EU migrants currently working in the UK would fail to meet visa requirements currently in place for non-EU workers — including 94 per cent of those working in Britain’s hotels and restaurants; jobs particularly popular among Poles. 

Emigration of young Poles, the best brains in the country, is a personal trauma for me

According to the IBRiS survey, a little under half of British Poles would want to stay in the UK after a Brexit, whatever the costs, while 26 per cent said they would go back to Poland if the UK did not allow them to stay.

“Any significant [post-Brexit] deal with Europe would need to address the problem of free flow of labour force and proper guarantees for migrant workers,” Konrad Szymanski, Poland’s Europe minister told the FT. “We will prioritise it during possible future negotiations.”

81%

Of EU migrants working in the UK would not meet visa requirements in place for non-EU workers

But Poland has much more to lose from Brexit, given the priorities the countries share. Both are sceptical about further political integration and Franco-German leadership; Poland would also be aghast to see the continent’s biggest defence player exit the EU — just as concerns over Russia have intensified. 

“Brexit is a bad scenario for Europe and for those who want to reform the Union to restore its principal roles,” said Mr Szymanski. “Disintegration of the EU means weaker Europe and weaker member states in the world.”

————————-

UK’s EU referendum: full coverage and analysis

View the FT’s comprehensive guide to the vote on whether Britain should stay in Europe, with all the latest news, analysis and commentary from both sides of the debate. See more 

————————-

