Market worries are deeper than the spectre of Brexit

2016-06-17

Causation is maddeningly difficult to ascertain in markets. The products of a multitude of decisions by different actors with different motives, market moves may not have any one cause. But as humans we have a strong desire to draw links, and to answer the question “why?”. That can lead us to ascribe causation when none exists.

This is by way of caution before trying to explain the juncture that markets have reached. Many reliable measures of anxiety and risk-aversion show that investors are deeply alarmed, or even braced for a crisis.

And this week will see a referendum on British membership of the EU that is momentous for the UK, but will also have profound implications for the rest of the EU. It dominates discussion in financial markets, even in North America and Asia. So, is the spasm of fear running through the markets driven by fears of Brexit? And should we infer that a vote to leave would create a crisis?

Let us start with the evidence of alarm. It is everywhere. Gold is up 25 per cent since its recent low in December last year, at its highest level since August 2014. It is, of course, a classic “haven”.

The yen, the currency to which investors traditionally rush at times of stress, is at its strongest level since August 2014, despite attempts by Japan to weaken it. The dollar has fallen by 17.7 per cent against the yen since last summer. 

Most telling are government bonds. The yield on German Bunds went briefly negative this week. This is unprecedented and until recently unthinkable. It implies, in normal circumstances, that people are so despairing about the prospects of economic growth over the next decade that they are prepared to guarantee themselves a very small loss by lending to the German government.

In the US, with a stronger economy at present than Germany’s, 10-year Treasury yields have dropped to their lowest level since August 2012, and are within 15 basis points of their secular low, also from 2012. This is happening even as the US unemployment rate returns to normal, wages are rising, and the Federal Reserve is talking about raising rates.

Bank stocks are also suffering, suggesting angst about the financial system. Deutsche Bank’s share price fell at one point to its lowest ever — lower than at the worst of the eurozone crisis, or the post-Lehman financial crisis of 2008.

What can explain such things? The Brexit campaign might do so. There are many good arguments on either side of the case that British voters should consider, but as far as international markets are concerned, the mess and the confusion that an exit would spark, and the precedent it would set for further exits from the EU thereafter, would ratchet up uncertainty. It is a cliché that markets hate nothing more than uncertainty, but it is no less true for all that.

It is hard to gauge the likely result. Only last year, opinion polls were badly wrong about the last UK general election. But traders have a number of resources. Their Bloomberg terminals feature updates of the probability of a “leave” vote drawn from the Oddschecker website’s culling of betting sites. That showed the odds of a Brexit rise from about 20 per cent three weeks ago, to 45 per cent earlier this past week.

That overlaps neatly with markets’ slide into anxiety. More suggestively, a sharp change in the odds on Brexit, following Thursday’s tragic events in the UK, brought the chance down to 36 per cent, and saw bond yields pick up, and currency markets turn.

But now for an alternative reality. Bond yields and bank shares have been trending down for a long time. These trends predate British prime minister David Cameron’s now apparently unwise promise to hold a referendum. And other moves are afoot.

The US jobs figures for May, announced earlier this month as the odds of Brexit were rising, were awful. So awful that they may well have been an outlying statistical glitch in a data series that is notoriously prone to revisions, but still bad news.

That data came as the Federal Reserve was trying to prepare markets for a potential rise in rates — which would be only the second since they spent the best part of a decade at zero — at its June meeting, which came this week. There was no rate rise. More surprisingly, Janet Yellen, the Fed’s chair, made little attempt to persuade investors that a rate rise might come next month. The Fed’s assessment of the economy was downbeat, and several governors now expect only one rate rise this year.

This news naturally depresses bond yields and bank share prices. And the market is betting that the Fed will be even more lenient. Fed Funds futures put the chance that there are no rate rises this year at above 60 per cent. That may be a dangerous bet, but its roots are deep and have nothing to do with Brexit.

Brexit is weighing on markets. That much is true. If Britons vote to remain in Europe this week, they will almost certainly prompt a short-term rally. But to attribute all markets’ worries to the referendum is, alas, wishful thinking.

john.authers@ft.com

