The Brexiters’ ‘Wrong then, wrong now’ is trite not right

2016-06-21

“Wrong then, wrong now” is the Brexiter’s catch-all dismissal of any suggestion that leaving the EU could be bad for the UK economy. 

Households are likely to be worse off on average, says the International Monetary Fund. It did not predict the financial crisis; wrong then, wrong now.

Brexit could tip the UK economy into a recession, says the Treasury. It supported Britain joining the euro; wrong then, wrong now, comes the response.

John Major warns of the threat of a Brexit vote to the continued union of England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. He was the chancellor who took Britain into Europe’s exchange rate mechanism in 1990; wrong then, wrong now.

This is the lowest form of argument, attacking the person or institution rather than addressing the case being made. Such a debasement of Britain’s discourse is on a par with Michael Gove’s view that “people in this country have had enough of experts”.

The effect on politics aside, there are numerous counter examples. 

George Soros said on Tuesday that a vote for Brexit risks a “black Friday” in the currency markets, which would “make some people very rich but most voters considerably poorer”. He was, of course, spectacularly right about the exchange rate mechanism and made his fortune on betting against sterling in 1992.

What about the Treasury? It carried out the “five tests” for Britain’s membership of the euro in 2003, led by Treasury official Sir David Ramsden. Those reports came to the conclusion that Britain should not join the single currency. With hindsight, the Treasury was “right then”. Both of the Treasury’s reports into Brexit were led by, you guessed it, the same Sir Dave.

What about the financial crisis? Few people predicted it but one was Nouriel Roubini of NYU Stern School of Business. Admittedly, Mr Roubini, aka Dr Doom, has subsequently predicted many crises that have not materialised. He says, however, that Brexit “could stall the UK economy and tip it into a recession as the shock to business and consumer confidence could be severe”.

Perhaps the person who saw the crisis coming most clearly was Raghuram Rajan, outgoing head of the Indian central bank, a former chief economist of the IMF, and professor at the University of Chicago. He was working for the IMF in 2005 when he was slammed by the global economics establishment for worrying about a house of cards in the financial system. He has not predicted that every global event will turn into a financial crisis but did say Brexit would be “damaging”. He reassured India that he would do everything to “enable us to ride out imminent sources of market volatility like the threat of Brexit”.

None of these examples proves the UK will suffer horribly after voting to leave the EU but they should serve to help us consign the phrase “wrong then, wrong now” to the dustbin.

chris.giles@ft.com

