UK pension industry, which  tries to calm investor fears after Brexit vote

2016-06-24

Pension investors were being urged not to panic following Britain’s vote to leave the EU, which sent financial markets and retirement funds tumbling.

Financial advisers and the pension industry sought to reassure savers that their funds were being “professionally looked after”. 

“The UK insurance and long-term savings industry is strong and built to protect customers from market uncertainty and shocks,” said the Association of British Insurers, the trade body for pension providers.

“Having your savings in a fund managed by a pension provider means they are being professionally looked after, and this will include strategies to minimise the impact of any periods of poor performance.”

Aegon, a leading pension provider, said that the key message to its pension savers was “don’t panic”. 

“If you have a defined contribution or personal pension, its value will be affected by stock market movements and if you are thinking of taking money out in the immediate future, we recommend you first seek advice,” said Steven Cameron, pensions director at Aegon UK.

While investors were being urged to remain calm, advisers warned of a “double whammy” for those coming up to retirement who planned to buy an annuity, where a pension pot is exchanged for a guaranteed income. 

“In the immediate short term people approaching retirement could suffer from the double-whammy effect; falling stock markets and falling annuity rates,” said Billy Burrows of William Burrows Annuities.

Latest updates on the political and market fallout

“Yields on gilts are already at historically low levels and may fall even further, resulting in even lower annuity rates.”

Managers of company pension schemes, responsible for paying the pensions of millions of members, appealed to the government to set out its plan for Brexit quickly.

“It is essential that the UK government takes action to reassure the markets,” said the Pensions and Lifetime Savings Association, which represents about 1,300 workplace pension schemes.

“Policymakers must quickly turn their attention to making clear their long-term plan for the UK to protect pension schemes and their savers.”

Legal advisers also sought to reassure members of traditional defined benefit company pension schemes, of which there are 11m members, that the Brexit vote would not lead to any sudden changes.

“The key message in relation to existing pensions law is that the vote to leave the EU does not have any immediate impact,” said Matthew Swynnerton, pensions partner at DLA Piper, a law firm.

“Whilst significant areas of UK pensions legislation originate from the EU — such as, scheme specific funding requirements for defined benefit schemes and non-discrimination — because these provisions have been implemented into national law they remain intact despite the outcome of the referendum.”

What the vote means for trade, immigration and growth has yet to be determined

However, pension experts said that, following the vote, a cloud hung over the future of the “triple lock”, which guarantees the state pension will rise by the higher of prices, average earnings or 2.5 per cent.

“During the referendum campaign the prime minister warned that a Leave vote could mean the end of the triple lock on state pensions,” said Tom McPhail, head of retirement policy with Hargreaves Lansdown, the investment managers.

“If the chancellor does now carry out his threat of a scorched earth Budget, then the triple lock could be an early casualty.”

