Brexit will not cause financial crisis, says BoE’s Mark Carney

2016-06-24

The world’s central banks, finance ministers and financial institutions rallied to help the Bank of England in its hour of need on Friday, issuing multiple statements reassuring investors that their assets were safe. 

Despite risks that it might be interpreted as panic, the Group of Seven leading countries issued a statement of its own declaring the UK’s economy and financial system were “resilient”, that they still sought to prevent “disorderly movements in exchange rates” and were ready to pump money into the financial system “to support the functioning of markets”.

The co-ordinated efforts to soothe markets were in stark contrast to initial efforts during the financial crisis of 2008 and came following telephone calls between Mr Carney, BoE governor, and Mario Draghi, president of the European Central Bank, according to European officials.

The actions by the central banks were led by the BoE, which has been making contingency plans for Brexit over the past few months. Mr Carney emulated the success of the ECB president in 2012 with his commitment that the central bank “will not hesitate to take any additional measures required”.

But Mr Carney stressed that the BoE could only mitigate the damage rather than resolve it. 

“There will be a period of uncertainty and adjustment following this result,” the governor said and in the longer-term the UK economy would suffer because “the economy will adjust to new trading relationships that will be put in place over time”.

Mr Carney spoke directly to camera from the BoE, appearing visibly shocked after the UK’s vote for Brexit provoked swings in financial markets around the world.

A statement later in the day emphasised the point. “The Bank of England cannot (and should not) stand in the way of these necessary adjustments. But we will work to ensure the financial system can function effectively as they take place, so that any effect on jobs and growth is not magnified,” it said.

After it became clear on Friday morning that the Leave camp would win, the pound plunged to a 30-year low. The prime minister later resigned, two credit rating agencies announced Britain would be downgraded and there were losses in stock markets.

But Mr Carney noted that banks were more resilient than in 2008 when many failed, with much bigger buffers against losses and more liquid assets. 

In addition, he said the BoE would provide an extra £250bn of funds through its normal central banking facilities and substantial foreign currency lending to banks if they ran short of dollars, euros or yen. 

Mr Carney’s actions were underpinned by a series of statements from around the world. The Federal Reserve pledged to provide dollars to other central banks if necessary to alleviate financial market turbulence that it said could hit the US economy

In a statement issued hours after the UK voted to leave the EU, the Fed said it was ready to funnel dollars to other central banks. 

Christine Lagarde, managing director of the International Monetary Fund, said she supported efforts “to supply liquidity to the banking system and curtail excess financial volatility”.

UK regulators also promised to take “all necessary” steps to ensure financial stability, raising the possibility that the Financial Conduct Authority could temporarily restrict the short selling of certain shares — that is, when traders borrow shares then sell them in the expectation their value will fall, buying them back at a lower price and pocketing the difference.

After a 10 per cent drop in a particular share, the FCA can take a view on whether to invoke its restrictions. Other EU regulators have the same powers.

While banks’ shares fell sharply in early morning trading — by as much as 34 per cent at the taxpayer-controlled Royal Bank of Scotland — before regaining mid-morning, no regulatory disclosures were filed by investors that they had taken short positions in UK banks, although they would have until Monday afternoon to do so.

The BoE’s Prudential Regulation Authority, meanwhile, has already told banks to stockpile cash and ensure ATMs and websites are working in case customers rush to withdraw their savings.

————————-

FT Post-Referendum BriefingWhat next?

FT journalists will be discussing what’s next for Britain and the EU, on Monday June 27, in London. Find more details here.

————————-

