Brexit polls lift CYBG, UK-exposed stocks in Oz

2016-06-20

Australian stocks with UK exposure have jumped on Monday after weekend polls showed Britain’s leave campaign to exit the European Union had lost some momentum.

The depository receipts of CYBG, the UK lender formerly known as Clydesdale, gained as much as 6 per cent in Sydney this morning. It is the biggest one-day gain since an 11.4 per cent advance on May 25, after the company announced an increase in profit, and cost savings ahead of guidance.

Australia’s benchmark S&P/ASX 200 is up 1.1 per cent.

Andrew Lappan, an investment adviser at stockbroker Shaw and Partners in Sydney, said:

The Australian market’s rally is a response to the Brexit poll on the weekend. Look at CYBG and Henderson Group today; those stocks that have exposure to UK/Europe are having a good run, which you can put down to the likelihood of a Brexit not happening.

CYBG used to be National Australia Bank’s UK assets, which were bought in the late 1980s and have been a persistent thorn in the side of NAB’s earnings performance and constantly held up as an example of Australian companies’ chequered history with offshore acquisitions. 

NAB spun off CYBG in an IPO at the start of February, and the divergence in fortune has been stark. CYBG is up 37.5 per cent, while NAB has gained 0.1 per cent over the same period. Among rival “Four Pillar” banks, ANZ Banking Group is up 3.5 per cent in that time, Westpac is up 2.5 per cent and Commonwealth Bank is flat.

Continued concerns about the health of Australia’s housing market have weighed on sentiment toward domestic banks.

While CYBG’s jump today might be Brexit-related, that argument probably doesn’t hold so well over past months. The British pound, which has been at the forefront of Brexit concerns, is down 0.2 per cent since early February.

The ASX-listed shares of Henderson Group, the global fund manager, has high exposure to the UK and is up as much as 4.6 per cent today. Arguably, Henderson has shown the impact of Brexit concerns this year more than CYBG, having fallen by 20.6 per cent in 2016-to-date.

