European and US banks caught up in Brexit reaction

2016-06-24

Banks across Europe and the US were caught up in the negative reaction to Britain’s EU referendum result, with European banks’ shares tumbling and American lenders facing uncertainties over the future of their large UK operations. 

In the US, banks opened sharply down. Morgan Stanley and Citigroup were the hardest hit soon after the open in New York, down about 9 per cent and 8 per cent respectively. Bank of America dropped 6.8 per cent, JPMorgan Chase 5.3 per cent and Goldman Sachs 6.1 per cent.

Shares in Italy’s two largest banks Intesa Sanpaolo and UniCredit, closed down almost 23 per cent and almost 24 per cent respectively. UniCredit said it had taken €26.6bn from the European Central Bank’s latest funding operation, a move that could suggest the bank was not confident about its ability to fund in the markets. 

In Spain, Banco Santander and Banco Sabadell’s stocks fell more than 14 per cent and 19 per cent respectively. Germany’s Deutsche Bank dropped about 14 per cent. Its chief executive John Cryan warned the consequences of Brexit will be “negative on all sides”. 

In a note to clients, Citi said investment banks would be hit because the volume of new issuance and trading activity was likely to be “subdued for some time on heightened uncertainty”. EU banks with UK operations — such as Santander, Bank of Ireland and Sabadell — will also get hit directly on FX translation “as the sterling weakens versus the euro”, the analysts said.

Bank of Ireland closed down more than 20 per cent and Greece’s big banks were down about 30 per cent. 

Investment banks are also battling to keep all systems going for a period of massive trading volumes and uncertainty and contemplating significant changes in their organisational structures, which are centred around London as a hub for access to the European Union. 

City leaders shockedBusiness leaders respond with horror, writes Patrick Jenkins

Mayhem and damage controlCEOs rush to reassure despite share falls

Instant insightLeave vote is bad for Europe’s financial system, not just London

Lombard liveAdrenalin runs high as traders rush to make sense of it all

Insurance falls heavilyShares across sector drop sharply

Daniel Pinto, the London-based head of JPMorgan’s investment bank, said financial markets were “settling down a bit from their lows” by mid-morning, adding that the US bank had handled $60bn of FX trades through Asia overnight — far outstripping usual volumes — without any hitches in its electronic trading platforms.

“The market is recovering, so obviously you have some people coming back in,” Mr Pinto said, adding that with UK share prices and the pound both down sharply, some investors were looking for potential bargains. “UK assets are effectively 20 per cent cheaper than the night before, so people are asking if that is value,” he said.

Bankers said the mood on their trading floors remained calm, even if some sleep-deprived traders did “look like they’ve come in their pyjamas”. One investment banker said that all their systems were operating normal, despite volumes four times as high as they would usually see, and that clients had not told his bank about running into issues with any other banks. A person at another bank said their trading floor was busy but “no one is shouting”.

“This is not 2008 or 2012. Those were unprecedented unmanageable circumstances, this is more noise than substance,” said Marco Mazzucchelli, a senior Julius Baer executive who was previously head of European investment banking at Credit Suisse.

Lawyers are warning banks could lose their ability to sell products and services into the EU from London under so-called passporting arrangement that could be put in jeopardy by Brexit. This is fuelling fears of large-scale job losses in the UK financial services sector.

JPMorgan’s chief executive Jamie Dimon, who recently warned that as many as 4,000 of the US bank’s 16,000 staff in the UK could be shifted out of the country, said in a memo to staff on Friday: “In the months ahead . . . we may need to make changes to our European legal entity structure and the location of some roles.”

“While these changes are not certain, we have to be prepared to comply with new laws as we serve our clients around the world,” Mr Dimon said. “We are hopeful that policymakers will recognise the immense value created through a continued open economic engagement between the UK and EU members.”

Jonathan Lewis, head of Nomura International, said those were questions for another day: “What we’ve been making very clear to staff today is that it’s important we provide support and focus to our clients today and in the coming days and weeks and manage risk well . . . we’ve got time to think about our longer term structures.”

“We believe this outcome has serious implications for the City and many of our clients’ businesses with exposure to the UK and the EU,” said Malcolm Sweeting, senior partner at Clifford Chance. “We are working alongside our clients to help them as they anticipate, plan for and manage the challenges the coming political and trade negotiations will bring.”

Reporting by Laura Noonan and Martin Arnold in London, Rachel Sanderson in Milan, Tobias Buck in Madrid, James Shotter in Frankfurt and Alistair Gray in New York.

