Study challenges immigration job fears

2016-06-19

Claims that migrants are crowding British citizens out of the jobs market are challenged in new research showing that areas with a higher proportion of migrants in employment also have a higher proportion of UK-born people in the workforce.

With migration front and centre of debate in the final days of the EU referendum campaign, think-tank International Longevity Centre said immigration could help the UK cope with the challenge of an ageing population.

“An increase in the number of migrants in the labour force can actually help increase employment opportunities,” said the ILC.

The idea that migrants and UK-born citizens competed for the same, finite number of jobs was fallacious since it was based on the premise that the UK economy comprised a fixed number of jobs.

The ILC examined local authority data which showed that on average, higher employment rates were present in white UK-born populations when they were also higher in non-UK born populations.

This helped to “dispel the notion” that migrants crowd out the labour force at a local level, said the ILC.

The think-tank argued in a report that Britain’s ageing population would benefit from a vibrant migrant workforce in the long run, helping to mitigate the impact of ageing on government spending. 

Non-UK nationals living in Britain were more likely than UK nationals to be of working age. Out of all those living in the UK, more than three-quarters from the European Economic Area and more than 80 per cent of non-EEA nationals were aged 15-64, compared to fewer than two-thirds of British nationals.

Restricting migration could cost £625bn — or 11.4 per cent of GDP — by 2064-65, the report claimed. It added that Britain’s over-65s population was expected to double and the number of over-85s more than quadruple in the period from 2000 to 2050, but the working population would rise by only a fifth in that period.

“Whether we remain in the EU or not, the UK will have to accept that migrants will play a large role in the future of the labour market, as it does in most other developed economies,” said the report’s authors Dean Hochlaf and Ben Franklin.

“As long as the UK has a strong and growing economy, more people will want to come to the UK than to leave it. Since migration helps to support growth and the sustainability of public finances as our society ages, we need not fear it.”

