Direct Brexit impact on China limited but shadow cast over policy

2016-06-24

Chinese onshore asset prices were reasonably stable as the results of the UK vote trickled in on Friday. The Shanghai Composite Index fell just 1.38 per cent, compared with the Hang Seng Index’s 4.3 per cent plunge and the Nikkei’s nearly 8 per cent drop. Onshore renminbi (CNY) gapped down 0.6 per cent against the dollar, well within its 2 per cent daily trading range, while its offshore counterpart dropped nearly 1 per cent (the dollar index has risen nearly 3 per cent in response to the vote as part of a global flight to safety). 

Sterling-denominated assets may be experiencing record volatility but China appears well insulated from these storms. Capital controls, which have been strengthened since last August’s botched renminbi devaluation, will continue to shield the financial system. 

The PBoC will be watching developments closely and may try to stabilise the onshore renminbi rate via the morning fix and indirect interventions in spot trading. Extraordinary pressure on sterling and the euro will impact the non-dollar portion of China’s foreign exchange reserve holdings, meaning headline numbers may fall sharply in June and July (we estimated that $25bn of May’s $27.9bn fall was due to exchange rate valuation changes). 

Although these will only add to concerns about outflows, the US Federal Reserve will lend a hand to maintain calm: the Brexit vote is likely to push back any rate hike, while markets have begun pricing in the next move to be a rate cut. 

Renewed global market volatility also argues for increased provisions of short-term liquidity. As the end of the first half approaches, the PBoC had been pumping more funding into the system. It has injected a net Rmb290bn so far in June via open market operations (see chart) and offered another Rmb208bn via its medium-term lending facility.

Repurchase agreement rates, a gauge of financial system stability, have been relatively steady, with the seven-day rate still below 2.5 per cent (see chart). That said, rumours of another cut to the reserve requirement ratio in the onshore market were circulating even before Friday’s vote result.

The PBoC will pay even closer attention to financial system risk and we expect a lighter touch with regard to rising credit risk. Although the bond market had been pricing in even more defaults, regulators may be less likely to allow market failures until the global coast clears.

The ripple effects of this vote threaten to weigh on an already-fragile global economic recovery and are a negative for China’s outlook. June indices released so far by FT Confidential Research suggest that the impact of the first quarter stimulus is already fading: consumer sentiment has fallen back amid growing unease about the economy’s health while freight activity remains sluggish. Brexit creates fresh uncertainty, even as markets continue digesting the implications of comments by an “authoritative person” published in the People’s Daily in early May. The comments were clear evidence of an intensified debate at the very top of the government about the dangers of relying on debt creation to drive economic growth. Although their publication appeared to mark an end of the stimulus policies seen at the start of 2016, renewed global economic uncertainty will test this resolve. 

At the time of the essay’s publication, reform advocates had the luxury of demanding greater progress against a backdrop of relative global economic stability. That is no longer the case.

