Brexit vote could trigger string of FX interventions – Deutsche

2016-06-17

If the UK votes to leave the EU, and the markets go haywire, expect a string of official interventions in the currencies market, including from the Bank of England, says Deutsche Bank’s Alan Ruskin.

In a note, Mr Ruskin says the Bank of Japan would likely step in if the dollar “threatened or breached” Y100. That’s not in keeping with the preference among major economies to leave currencies to market forces.

But, he writes…

Presumably, the Yen would also be registering even larger gains versus European currencies in such circumstances. In that situation, the BOJ would likely intervene ‘under the cover’ of the UK referendum vote, by making a strong case to the US and G20, that i) Japan is being placed under unique duress from a dramatic tightening in financial conditions allied to the stronger yen; and, ii) that the exchange rate is reflective of volatile international events, and not domestic conditions.

He also thinks the BoE could take this rare step too.

Were sterling trading to become particularly unruly following the UK referendum (say sterling through $1.30 and continuing to drop) the BOE is unlikely to sit idly by. Were the BOE to intervene to support the pound, it would make sense to also have the ECB and Fed intervene on the BOE’s behalf, as a signal of global solidarity.

Over at Goldman Sachs, Silvia Ardagna also writes that the BoJ could potentially deliver a surprise bout of easing even before its next scheduled meeting in July if the yen jumps uncomfortably high. She adds:

It is more challenging to predict the size of the currency moves. Indeed, it is difficult to assess at this stage how large and persistent the shock will be and how much the price action will be affected by positioning and market liquidity. Sentiment could turn very negative if worries around systemic risk build up. At the same time, we expect central banks to respond decisively and in a coordinated way to alleviate funding stress that could arise in markets.

Ms Ardagna added that the Norwegian krone and Swiss franc would likely have more space to rally in the event of a flight to safety, as their central banks “are less likely to respond aggressively”.

Related reading: 50 Ways To Hedge Your Brexit: Part 1; Part 2

