Sovereign bond yields plumb new lows on Brexit risk

2016-06-16

Brexit jitters sent UK borrowing rates to a fresh low on Thursday as investors digested the Bank of England’s gloomy prognosis that a vote to Leave could result in economic recession.

The BoE, Bank of Japan and US Federal Reserve have all cited Brexit as a global risk in the last 24 hours, helping to ignite a worldwide rally in safe assets.

With less than one week to go before the UK decides on its future in the EU, polls show that the ‘Leave’ campaign has strengthened its lead over ‘Remain’.

The shift has strengthened demand for safe, fixed income assets, pushing the yield on benchmark 10-year gilts to a fresh low of 1.07 per cent and leaving Switzerland’s entire government bond market close to falling into negative territory — meaning investors pay more than they receive in interest and repayment of principal. 

Yields in Swiss bond markets out to 2049 are now trading at sub-zero rates — leaving only two government bonds with positive interest rates. One, a 2058 bond, offers an annual yield of 2 basis points. The other, which does not mature until 2064, pays just 6 bps. 

“Switzerland is trying to avoid pressure on the Swiss franc and they may well continue to intervene if investor inflows continue like this,” said Patrick Zweifel, Pictet’s chief economist.

Gold prices rose to a two-year high and equities weakened, while the yield on benchmark 10-year US Treasurys touched 1.52 per cent — the lowest level since the days of the eurozone crisis — following the US Federal Reserve’s decision to leave rates unchanged and trim forecasts.

The FT’s guide to the UK’s EU referendum

Two year US paper, the most responsive to interest rate policy, dipped 1bp to 0.66 per cent. 

The gains in sovereign bond markets contrast with losses across equity bourses that sent an index tracking European banks to its lowest level since August 2012 and left the US benchmark down for the sixth consecutive day.

“It has come down to what’s happening in the UK,” said Ian Lyngen, senior government bond strategist with CRT Capital. Describing the referendum as the “big risk event” facing markets, he added: “If we get a further deterioration in the data or economic outlook, or a leave vote in the UK, we could most certainly see a further drop in yields and challenge the 2012 lows.”

————————-

UK’s EU referendum: full coverage and analysis

View the FT’s comprehensive guide to the vote on whether Britain should stay in Europe, with all the latest news, analysis and commentary from both sides of the debate. See more 

————————-

