Brussels briefing: misjudging the markets

2016-06-21

Some sovereignty obsessed people with little practical economic sense are preparing to make a decision with the potential to seriously spook European markets. And no, we don’t mean the Brexit referendum.

In a few hours Germany’s highest court will rule on the legality of the European Central Bank’s most contentious weapon in fighting the financial crisis. At 10am local time, Mario Draghi’s ‘whatever it takes’ scheme will meet the ‘whatever we say’ of the Karlsruhe.

This is the finale of a long legal saga that has dogged the ECB’s Outright Monetary Transactions programme for most of its 4-year existence. Mr Draghi’s promise to, if necessary, buy unlimited eurozone bonds has never been used, but its effects were palpable. Mr Draghi challenged the speculators to bet against him, and they blinked.

The FT’s ECB watcher Clare Jones does a fine job of explaining the issues and the ping-pong between the Karlsruhe and the European Court of Justice that preceded this decision. The bottom line is that the Karlsruhe has already voiced reservations about the design of OMT – and may today take a stricter line than the ECJ. At worst it could legally hobble the scheme.

The timing is extraordinarily. On an economic level, markets are already fretting over the referendum. The ECB and the Bank of England are preparing to flood the market with liquidity and take some edge off a negative reaction. But if investors seriously turn against the eurozone periphery – as officials in Brussels and Frankfurt fear – OMT could be crucial. Its credibility matters.

On a political level, too, this is an unusually sensitive moment. What are the implications of a national court thumbing its nose at the ECJ on such an important EU policy decision? For decades the Karlsruhe has coexisted with Europe’s highest court in an uneasy legal truce, with each one claiming supremacy and the final say on law but never testing the premise to the point of destruction.

If the Karlsruhe imposes its will – and takes back control, as the Brexiters would say – what will British eurosceptics think? It could certainly inspire some interesting lawmaking in Westminster, even if there is a Remain vote on Thursday.

BREXIT MARKET RALLY

The polls are looking better for Remain. It is still close, but the apparent swing was enough for sterling made its biggest one-day gains in eight years.

And for the stocks to bounce back as well.

The FT’s Chris Giles has pulled together a fantastic piece on the economic impact of Brexit – in seven charts. This one on product market regulation – the alleged yoke around the neck of the British economy – is particularly good.

LATEST BREXIT POLLS

ORB poll for Daily Telegraph: Remain 53/46 point lead

YouGov online poll for The Times: Leave 44/42 in front

NatCen (unique methodology): Remain 53/47 ahead

What should we make of the latest twists and turns?

Sir Lynton Crosby, the pollster who masterminded the Tory election victory, notes an important shift in turnout expectations, with Remain voters now appearing more motivated.

James Morris, a former pollster for the Labour party, said he “wouldn’t be surprised at all if Remain do significantly better” than their best final week poll. His reasons: economy ranked higher than immigration, rising fear over Brexit costs, and pollsters find the hardest to contact are more likely to be Remain.

John Curtice, the éminence grise of British pollsters and a NatCen fellow, is more cautious about calling the result in such a close race. And just to confuse matters more, his research debunks some of the emerging narratives on how Remain voters are harder for pollsters to reach.

BREXIT COMMENTARY

Britain should get up and shun the hatemongers (Cohen, NY Times)

Only speculators will gain from referendum Black Friday (Soros, Guardian)

A vote to leave will benefit the world (Daily Telegraph)

A referendum fight for hearts and wallets (Parker, FT)

Leave will give oxygen to Scottish nationalists (Davidson, FT)

A referendum that is naive and necessary (Ganesh, FT)

Just Leave, we’re better off without Britain (von der Dunk, FP)

ODDS AND ENDS

Taking on Hollande: Libération has a handy run-through of likely challengers to sitting president François Hollande in a primary contest to pick the French centre-left’s candidate for the May 2017 elections. Former economy minister and subsequent serial rebel Arnaud Montebourg is high on the list. Le Figaro sees the Emmanuel Macron star waning.

Spanish swing: Expansión has a useful explainer of the 22 marginal constituencies that will decide which party (or more likely coalition) wins Spain’s general election on Sunday.

Turkey crackdown: More worries about Turkey. A court on Monday placed three prominent press freedom campaigners – including an academic and Erol Önderoglu, Turkey expert at “Reporters without Borders” – in pre-trial detention for “terrorist propaganda”. Separately the New York correspondent of Hurriyet, Turkey’s best selling daily, was detained on arrival at Istanbul airport.

Brussels terror: Police launched another set of anti-terror raids in the Belgian capital on Monday, with six people taken in for questioning.

“If you leave me now…”: Businesses and politicians across Europe turned on the charm to try to keep Brits from voting for Brexit. A troupe of French businesses signed a letter to their “amis britanniques”. The notoriously soppy Hungarian prime minister Viktor Orban then got in on the act with an ad in The Times.

Refugee realities: The FT will follow the lives of three refugees starting anew in Germany. One is trapped in the iniquity of the EU’s Dublin system, on the brink of deportation because he was first registered in Hungary. Another is looking at becoming an eye doctor once more, while a third is starting a degree at a German university.

