In Brexit Britain, the Ins and Outs are strangers to each other

2016-06-24

“Is it worth risking the next generation’s future?” asked George Fuller, a politically engaged 17-year-old from south-east London and thus too young to vote on Thursday. “It is an awful decision.”

Young people flooded on to social media on Friday to express their outrage as it emerged that while the young had voted overwhelmingly to Remain, the final tally was swayed by more Eurosceptic older voters. Polling by the Conservative peer Lord Ashcroft after the ballot closed on Thursday showed that 73 per cent of 18- to 24-year-olds had voted Remain, compared with just 40 per cent of those over 65.

“Older generations have benefited from being a member of the EU and they’re taking that away from us” said Claudia Gordon, a 21-year-old Londoner studying at Edinburgh university. “For us, part of our identity was belonging to the EU . . . we now feel isolated from a community we felt part of.”

“We know what we wanted and they’ve took it from us,” tweeted Reece Waterfield, a young Remainer. 

The generational difference was only one of the divides apparent in the results. The young, the better educated and people living in London, Scotland and Northern Ireland voted to Remain; older people, the less highly educated and those outside the largest cities in England voted Out, and in the end they had the numbers to prevail. 

The difference between residents of the capital and much of the rest of England was particularly stark. Sixty per cent of voters in London opted to Remain; across the rest of England it was just 45 per cent. 

Across the UK, many people who voted Leave knew virtually no one who was voting Remain and vice versa. As a result, many Remain voters were shocked as the results emerged on Friday morning. Commuters on a 6.15am train into central London were a case in point. “Most people I was talking to were saying Out, there were very few for In,” said Donna, a middle-aged voter living in Croydon. “People were sick of being dictated to — all I kept being told was to put the Great into Great Britain”.

Without admitting to how she voted, she confessed she was “one of those waverers . . . I said, ‘the first person who knocks on my door, I’ll vote for them’. But no one ever did. I didn’t read the leaflets, I put them all in the bin”.

The Leave vote is bad news for Europe’s financial system, not just London, writes Patrick JenkinsRead on

A few seats away, a young woman called Stevie was scrolling through expletive-filled messages on her phone from friends stunned that the UK had just voted to leave the EU. “I woke up and said, ‘you’ve got to be kidding me’,” she sighed. She said she worked in a financial technology company in the City and had plenty of European colleagues. “I don’t know anyone who voted Leave — but maybe that says something in itself.”

It was a similar story in the north of England. “I thought everyone was going to vote In,” said Liz Murphy, who lives in Colne in Lancashire, an area where 55 per cent voted Leave. “Most people I know wanted to remain.”

Newcastle, which has two large city-centre universities, just about recorded a Remain vote, with 50.3 per cent of votes cast but the rest of the north-east was for Leave. Among students in Newcastle voting for Remain was Anne Murray, 21, who has just finished a politics and economics degree. All the Newcastle University students she knew had voted Remain too, she said. “I’m very disappointed at the outcome.” 

Support for Brexit came mainly from disadvantaged parts of England, writes Matthew GoodwinRead on

But in the north-east there were other dynamics at work. In the past, close family ties have propagated support for Labour through multiple generations; in the referendum, this may have assured cross-generational support for Brexit. “Our family are all voting Out,” said Katy Brook, a 20-year-old Sunderland University student who lives in the city, as the votes were being counted in the small hours of Friday morning. 

The Leave campaign’s messages of immigration, jobs, pressure on public services such as the NHS and “taking control” certainly resonated with Jake, Rob and Tommy, aged between 21 and 30, employed in the building trade and living in Essex. All voted Out, saying that though they had not yet had problems finding work, they believed it would get harder in five or six years’ time if immigration continued at current levels. “Only a handful of people we know voted In,” they said. “We are surprised at the result but very pleased.”

“They say they do not recognise the country they grew up in,” said Edina, 34, a Hungarian living in London who did not give her last name. She was referring to the mood among her British friends in response to the level of anti-immigration feeling that had been stirred up in recent months.

But she might equally have been speaking for the millions who voted Out because of discontent over the arrival of large numbers of eastern European migrants since 2004 — people like Edina herself. 

