No end of reasons to whack Mexican peso

2016-06-22

Currency traders are treating the Mexican peso like a piñata. Emerging markets risks go up, and it gets whacked. Oil prices go down, it gets whacked. A poll shows that Britain might vote to leave the EU: whack and whack again. 

The result of all this is that the peso has become one of the most enduringly undervalued currencies — and, this year, it has been the worst performing currency in the world against the US dollar. 

The trouble is that the Mexican peso is by far the most liquid of the emerging markets currencies, trading about $135bn a day, 24 hours a day. That makes it an ideal vehicle for hedging all kinds of risks in the financial system. Every time there is something new to worry about, additional traders alight on the peso as a short, meaning it never fully recovers from the last scare. 

Most recently, it has started to move in line with sterling as traders use it as a Brexit hedge— even though you would be hard pressed to discern an economic impact on Mexico from Britain opting out of a European free trade area. 

Low oil prices, however, have been really bad for Mexico: they have gutted the finances of the state oil company Pemex, and the government has had to cut spending as a result, reducing expectations for economic growth. 

So, having recovered to $50 a barrel, the stronger oil price should be alleviating some of that pressure. Instead, though, peso bears now point to a wall-building President Donald Trump as the next risk— although whether Mr Trump will ever turn his rhetoric into action is uncertain. 

As none of these declines in the peso can be explained by the fundamentals, the Bank of Mexico has already intervened once to push it higher: it announced an emergency interest rate rise in February when the currency hit 19 to the US dollar. It is not far from that low again, which will surely be on the mind of officials at the central bank’s meeting next Thursday. 

By then, we will know if Britain is leaving the EU. If the vote goes to Remain, that ought to relieve pressure on the peso. But do not count on it. There always seems to be some other reason to give the piñata a whack.

stephen.foley@ft.com

