Ford considers UK job cuts after Brexit vote as carmakers eye future

2016-06-24

Ford said on Friday that it may cut jobs in Britain in the wake of the country’s vote to leave the EU, becoming the first auto group to raise questions over the future of its investments in the country.

The group, which closed two UK plants in 2012 with the loss of thousands of jobs, said it “will take whatever action is needed” to keep its operations competitive. 

Many of the world’s largest car groups have manufacturing operations across Britain, and about 80 per cent of the cars that roll off UK production lines are destined for export — half of those to the rest of the EU.

Toyota, Jaguar Land Rover and Honda said they were committed to their UK operations, while BMW said there would be “no immediate change”.

But analysts said car companies will be wary of giving UK plants new work while the prospect of trade tariffs are looming.

Nick Gill, automotive expert at Capgemini, said: “If I’m a carmaker and I’m taking a decision on where next to place my model, are you going to do it in a market that’s small with concerns around currency and its distribution into other markets, or will you put it [in a place] with safety in currency and a large market for sales?”

Ford, which employs 14,000 people at its sites in Bridgend and Dagenham and last year made 1.6m engines, said it has “made no changes to our current investment plans and will not do so unless there is clear evidence that action is needed”.

But, it added: “We would expect that the combination of a softer industry and a weaker sterling would have an adverse impact on our operations in the long term.”

The company has been reducing its manufacturing capacity in Europe since the financial crash of 2008.

Jim Farley, chief executive of Ford’s European business, told the Financial Times last month that the company was looking to strip out more costs.

He said: “I don’t think a 113-year-old company would be thriving if it didn’t always look at its structural costs.”

The UK’s car industry made 1.6m vehicles last year, its best year in a decade, setting it on course to produce a record number by 2020.

Toyota, which last year made 170,000 cars at its Burnaston plant, said it will “closely monitor and analyse the impact on our business operations in the UK, and how we can maintain competitiveness”.

Europe and US feel impactBanks across Europe and the US were caught up in the negative reaction to the referendum result 

British public takes revenge on City The Leave vote is bad news for Europe’s financial system, not just London, writes Patrick Jenkins

Lombard: Disaster for CityVote to leave the EU will bring extended market volatility, writes Jonathan Guthrie.

Insurance falls heavilyConcerns about London’s insurance market escalate given its big attraction of passporting rights into the EU

Asset managers reelAberdeen Asset Management dropped 32 per cent while Schroders tumbled 17 per cent and Henderson fell 16 per cent in early trading

Chief executive Akio Toyoda had previously pledged that the company would keep its business in the Midlands, whatever the result.

Honda, which makes 140,000 cars a year in Swindon, said it was committed to its operations in the UK, while Jaguar Land Rover — Britain’s largest car producer at half a million vehicles — said it was “business as usual” until the negotiations over trade barriers were completed.

“Nothing has changed for us or the rest of the British automotive industry,” the company said.

BMW was more circumspect, saying it “will not speculate” about the impact trade negotiations may have on its businesses. Nissan, which runs the UK’s largest car plant in Sunderland and employs almost 7,000 people, declined to comment.

Aston Martin chief executive Andy Palmer pledged to push ahead with the super-luxury car maker’s new plant in Wales, a £200m project that will create 1,000 jobs. He suggested a Brexit might make Aston Martin exports more competitive in some markets, but added that the company would “need to increase our efficiencies” if it faces trade barriers.

Carmakers selling into the UK may also face falling demand. Analysts have warned that demand for new cars in the UK will fall by a fifth if the country enters a recession following the vote.

Appetite for new cars falls by 20 per cent in a “typical” downturn, Stuart Pearson, an analyst at Exane BNP Paribas, wrote to clients on Friday.

Arndt Ellinghorst, senior analyst at Evercore ISI, said global makers could see their profits fall by €8bn in the wake of Brexit.

Mike Hawes, chief executive of the UK motor body SMMT, said the pressure was now on the UK government “to secure a deal with the EU which safeguards UK automotive interests”.

