Free Lunch: Fed coming around to reality

2016-06-22

Better late than never

Something is changing at the helm of the Federal Reserve. After about year in which most US monetary policymakers seemed twitchy about pulling the trigger on interest rate rises — and did so once, last December — there has been a palpable cooling of tempers on the Federal Open Market Committee that sets Fed policy.

Janet Yellen gave her regular monetary policy report to the US Congress on Tuesday. It was taken by many observers as communicating a turn to a more cautious perspective on the economy. Yellen emphasised the disappointing recent data on the US economy as well as the global risks, including Thursday’s UK referendum, on which she said that a “vote to exit the European Union could have significant economic repercussions”. As she must do, she concluded that the Fed’s current policy plans are appropriate.

But that argument is becoming increasingly threadbare. It is more likely that Fed policy is too tight and that it will, as it has over the past years, have to adapt its plans to the much looser policy path the markets expect. (As the chart below shows, markets think it more likely than not there will be no rate hike until next February.)

There are three reasons to reject the view that current policy is appropriate. First, the justification is based on the seeming balance between a labour market that some think is hitting a speed limit and wage and price developments that show no sign of catching fire. But as Lael Brainard, a Fed governor, pointed out earlier this month, if the real economy is on a balanced path, that’s in large part thanks to market participants themselves loosening credit conditions because they increasingly disbelieve what the Fed says it will do. So if the Fed stance looks right, it’s in part because of its own loss of credibility.

Second, consider the most interesting change of mind on the FOMC. Observers scratched their heads at the last Fed “dot plot”, the chart indicating each FOMC members’ best guess at where the interest rate is heading, charted below.

The lonely dot at the bottom is new: it indicates that one FOMC member thinks rates will stay roughly where they are for the next couple of years. It comes courtesy of James Bullard, the St Louis Fed chief, who has provided a fascinating explanation of how he and his bank have overhauled how they think about the economy. The methodological change (explained in detail in a St Louis Fed paper) involves replacing a “concept of a single, long-run steady state to which the economy is converging” with a recognition of the possibility of many possible “regimes that the economy may visit [which are] viewed as persistent”.

The US economy is, Bullard thinks, in a persistent state characterised by low real interest rates and inflation and middling real growth, which makes the current policy rate appropriate. That rings true; and Bullard has been thinking in terms of these multiple steady states for some time. But in earlier work he has suggested that the shift between regimes is itself partly influenced by policy. It is natural to conclude that if we are in a middling-growth, low-inflation trap, the Fed bears some responsibility for getting us into it — and for getting us out again. While this is not what Bullard is saying now, that seems a logical implication of the analysis. And other economists, such as former Fed policymaker Narayana Kocherlakota, have sensibly argued that the conclusion Bullard and the rest of the Fed should draw is that rates need to be cut.

The third reason is hinted at by Ms Yellen herself. Her testimony gave a nod to the prophets of secular stagnation by stating that “we cannot rule out the possibility expressed by some prominent economists that the slow productivity growth seen in recent years will continue into the future”. But there are two strands of secular stagnationism: one focusing on productivity, the other on chronically weak demand. The productivity pessimism, if it were convincing (which it isn’t), would call for tighter rates, because the economy is running out of slack faster. Demand pessimism, on the other hand, is both more compatible with our low-inflation predicament and more straightforwardly something the Fed can do something about.

If demand is weak, that is a reason for the Fed to stimulate further, not debate how fast it should withdraw stimulus. Productivity may well rebound as a result. That is especially true because current low rates are not as low as they seem: as Brainard emphasises, a lower real rate is now consistent with fully utilising the economy’s potential so, seemingly, low central bank rates are not very stimulative.

Until the Fed aligns its conclusions more fully with its reasoning, one is tempted to share in Jared Bernstein’s cri de coeur and ask with him whether economists understand the economy.

Brexit watch

The Constitution Unit, a research group at University College London, sets out the law around a decision to leave the EU (in brief: it’s not pretty).

And Boris Johnson keeps claiming that 27 countries “have done better at exporting” to the EU than the UK has, and 21 “have done better at exporting services”. The UK in fact exports more than any other country into the rest of the EU, and more services than any economy but the US. It turns out that by “doing better”, many countries’ exports have grown faster. It is of course easier to grow from almost nothing to not very much than it is to grow further when one is already the biggest. If Johnson could improve his time at the 100m dash from 20 to 19 seconds, he would, on this definition, “do better at sprinting” than Usain Bolt, who only improves his time by hundredths of a second at a time.

Other readables

To receive Martin Sandbu’s Free Lunch by email every workday, sign up here.

