Brexit would unleash ‘new Lehman’ on world – Finland’s Stubb

2016-06-16

Global markets face a “Lehman Brothers” moment should Britain vote to leave the European Union next week, one of Europe’s finance ministers has warned.

Alexander Stubb, Finland’s outgoing finance minister, told the Financial Times that a victory for the leave campaign would unleash “economic mayhem” on the world, reports Jim Brunsden in Luxembourg. 

Speaking at the start of a regular meeting of euro-area ministers in Luxembourg, Mr Stubb said that the “the 72 hours that follow [the vote] are in many way unpredictable”.

“I think it would be the Lehman Brothers moment of Europe,” he said, in reference to the turmoil unleashed by the collapse of the US investment bank in September 2008, sparking the biggest financial crisis since the Great Depression.

“It will have ramifications not only on the City, not only on the UK, not only on Europe but I think for the rest of the world as well,” he said.

“All of the growth figures we got for this year and for the foreseeable future will be revamped [in the case of an out vote].”

Mr Stubb, a former Finnish prime minister and leader of the centre-right National Coalition Party, backed predictions made by George Osborne for the downturn that would follow an out vote.

UK Treasury figures are “just rough estimates but are probably not too far off of the truth,” he said.

“In the long term, we would be looking at a major shift in what we would call the post-WWII liberal democracies…Suddenly we would we hit with a backlash where localism as opposed to globalisation would win, where nationalism, the rejection of the other would win over opening up,” he said.

His warning comes after the world’s major central banks from the Federal Reserve to the Bank of Japan have warned of the impact of a potential Brexit vote in the last 24 hours. 

Mr Stubb is set to stand down shortly as finance minister after holding the post for a little over a year. His stepping down after losing the leadership of the National Coalition Party last week.

He added: “For the western world it would be a major shift. It would be a victory for Donald Trump, it would be a victory for Marine Le Pen, it would be a victory for Vladimir Putin, it would be a victory for Geert Wilders.”

