Political losses from Brexit will be deep and enduring

2016-06-24

Stock markets around the world, not having seen Brexit coming, will do what markets do, which is not just react but overreact to the news. At some point, however, they will probably snap back, recovering some even if not all of what they lost.

The same cannot be said of what might be described as political and strategic markets. They will follow a different trajectory. They, too, will lose altitude but more slowly. The difference, though, is that there will be no recovery. The losses are likely to turn out to be deep and enduring. 

The biggest and most obvious loser will be the UK. It is a question of when and not if Scotland moves to separate itself, this time with the all too real argument that it is more important to stay in Europe than in the UK. 

This will unfortunately be the tragic political legacy of David Cameron, the outgoing prime minister, whose decision to hold a referendum on Britain’s relationship with the EU will go down as one of history’s great blunders.

Northern Ireland, which has enjoyed an uneasy peace for almost 20 years, will find itself under new pressure. There are already calls to unify with Ireland — here, too, using the argument that it is a way (which for some will be more of a pretext) to stay in Europe. 

This will be fiercely resisted by Unionists, and the result will be an even more deeply divided population. Those in Northern Ireland or in the Cameron government who recklessly supported Brexit will have to contend with the costly consequences.

The overall result of a near evenly split vote and possible secessions will be a United Kingdom that is no longer united. It will also be poorer, weaker, and distracted. The country’s influence will be reduced in line with its diminished currency. 

The special relationship will be decidedly less special as Washington will have no choice but to find other partners

Lost, too, will be the British voice in Brussels. The danger here is that centrifugal forces in Europe will be strengthened as governments and politicians call for votes on their country’s relationship with the EU. 

Over time the gap between Germany and everyone else will grow, creating further tensions. The EU’s ability to play a meaningful role on the world stage will be reduced by the loss of its second-largest economy and strongest military. 

The historic accomplishment of European integration launched in the wake of the second world war, which brought with it unprecedented stability and prosperity, is at risk. The Brexit vote comes in a context in which Europe is already reeling from low economic growth, Russian aggression in Ukraine, and an influx of refugees. Making matters worse is the likelihood that EU officials are more likely to threaten other countries not to follow the UK’s lead than they are to address the EU’s flaws that in part fuelled the vote.

Hollande’s room for manoeuvre in Europe will now be limited, writes François Heisbourg

The US will also pay a price for Brexit. One of its closest partners in the world will have less to offer. And the UK will no longer be able to influence the course of EU foreign policy, something that on balance will work against American purposes in the world. 

The special relationship will be decidedly less special as Washington will have no choice but to find other partners in Europe, the Middle East and Asia.

It is impossible to write about Brexit without reflecting on its larger meaning and message. 

Many of those voting for Brexit were not voting to set in motion historic trends so much as to send a message of frustration, fear and anger. They succeeded, but at a great cost. It is a lesson for democracies and for institutions, that when they are perceived to be unresponsive or ineffective, people will turn to radical “solutions” that are anything but.

The writer is president of the Council on Foreign Relations and a former director of policy planning at the US state department

