Jo Cox, MP and activist, 1974-2016

2016-06-17

Of the multiplying grievances that voters have with their politicians, greed, partisanship and carpet-bagging tend to recur. The British Labour party MP Jo Cox, who was killed on Thursday at the age of 41, was a standing rebuttal to each slur. 

No visitor to the softly swaying riverboat she called home, whose only luxury was a view of Tower Bridge, confused her for someone on the make. Unmistakably Labour, she communed with Conservatives to change government policy towards refugees and the recipients of aid. As for the tenuous bond between MPs and their constituencies, Cox was born in Batley, West Yorkshire, the town she represented and where she was killed by an assailant outside her surgery. 

Her arrival in parliament last year was somehow inevitable and improbable at the same time. She had studied politics, advised lawmakers in London and Brussels, and served Oxfam as an aid worker and head of policy. As an incubation for life as an MP, it was classical. 

Before that, however, was a childhood that did not have Westminster’s neo-gothic splendour written all over it. Helen Joanne Leadbeater was born in 1974 to a mother who worked as a school secretary and a father who had a job in a factory where she herself would later earn money during holidays. Drive and intellect took her to Cambridge and beyond. She sometimes felt her lack of privilege but it left her with an insight into Labour’s core communities that more gilded colleagues have to grope for. 

Local credibility did not become an excuse for parochialism. If anything defined her as an MP, it was her global sensibility. She campaigned for Britain’s place in the EU, which she first navigated as a staffer for Glenys Kinnock MEP in the 1990s. 

She launched and chaired a cross-party group devoted to Syria and its suffering people. Last September, during one of David Cameron’s weekly jousts with MPs, she asked him whether he had “led public opinion on the refugee crisis or followed it”. Most opposition MPs hector the prime minister, fruitlessly. The force of her question was in its cold restraint. Mr Cameron, aides say, never forgot it. 

Her 13 months in parliament were not, by her reckoning, pristine. She regretted her decision to nominate Jeremy Corbyn as party leader, never expecting him to win the post. But her future eminence was never in doubt among colleagues or opponents, some of whom saw in her foreign secretary credentials. She will endure, instead, as a reminder of the burdens of public service — the precarious exposure that even an obscure MP must live with for no great material recompense. Parliamentary democracy only works as long as enough people agree to these unpromising terms. 

Referendum campaigning suspended after fatal attack on politician

More immediately, the shock of her killing — the first of an MP since Ian Gow died in an Irish Republican bomb blast in 1990 — has forced the campaigning ahead of next week’s referendum on EU membership to wind down. If it resumes, it will be muted. There is no appetite in any quarter for a return to the belligerence of the past month or so. In a sense, Cox’s civility has won out. Would that the change last beyond the referendum.

Time will pass before we understand what drove the person who shot and stabbed an MP doing her conscientious rounds, but her husband Brendan who shared her professional devotion to international development, has asked for unity against the “hatred that killed Jo”. He and their two young children survive her. 

