Opening Quote: Cameron’s Remain dividend

2016-06-22

David Cameron has promised a Remain dividend, Elementis has warned on profits. Hornby needs Airfixing. FT Opening Quote, with commentary by City Editor Jonathan Guthrie, is your early Square Mile briefing. You can sign up for the full newsletter here.

David Cameron has promised a “Remain dividend” if Britons vote to stay in the EU. In an interview with the FT, he said businesses and “job creators” would “pile back into the economy”.

It’s welcome to hear a positive message from the Remain camp, whose tendency to accentuate the negative resulted in the derogatory nickname Project Fear.

London Mayor Sadiq Khan squared the account last night by accusing Brexiters of mounting a Project Hate over immigration. The only missing constituency now is Project Crikey I’ll Be Glad When This Ghastly Referendum Is Over, to which OQ firmly belongs.

As to the Remain dividend, it’s likely sterling and equities would rally if the UK opts to stay in. Risks are heavily stacked on the downside, according to a currencies expert OQ talked to yesterday, not least because a recent surge in the pound has squeezed a lot of short money out of the market.

Brer Corporate Financier informs us that over £10bn of initial public offerings would be transacted largely through London (though not all would be London listings) in the next twelve months, if Remain wins. Floats would be much weaker if a Leave vote destabilised markets.

The prime minister tells the FT he has no regrets about calling the Brexit vote. Impressive how cheerily politicians can make such statements when inwardly they must feel like one of painter Francis Bacon’s screaming popes.

You know how model trains go round and round in circles? Hornby, which numbers the toys among its products, has published yet another turnaround plan. This focuses on cutting costs and maintaining brands. The group will raise £8m from a placing and is renegotiating banking facilities. Last year’s operating loss was £13.1m.

Speciality chemicals group Elementis has warned on profits. Earnings per share for the current financial year are expected to be lower than forecasts due to the weakness of Eastern European currencies against the dollar.

Debenhams, in contrast, expects full year profits to meet City targets. Like-for-like sales fell an atrophied 0.2 per cent in the 15 weeks to June 11 and rose a skinny 1.2 per cent over 41 weeks. The energy regulator Ofgem is consulting on remedies offered by SSE after an investigation identified competition concerns over the way the energy group connected up development sites

Thought you could escape Brexit amid the corporate news? You can run, but you can’t hide. Reuters reports Jaguar Land Rover has estimated annual profits could fall by £1bn by the end of the decade if the UK leaves the EU.

