Smooth trading in US equity markets despite sharp moves

2016-06-24

At the closing bell on Friday, the top brass at NYSE likely breathed a sigh of relief.

Some fingers pointed to the home of the Big Board last August when the US stock market dislocated in a day of heavy selling pressure. Declines in Asian bourses snowballed at the Wall Street open and wild trading ensued.

Some 1,278 stocks and exchange traded funds were halted for sharp moves, others were delayed from opening and electronic market makers backed away from the market – all raising questions about structure of the world’s largest equity market, writes Nicole Bullock in New York.

US stocks sold off sharply in heavy volume on Friday in the wake of the surprise Brexit vote, but trading, by all accounts, was orderly. The market clocked just 68 trading halts.

In part, the dynamics of the day were different. On August 24, stocks fell sharply and then rallied, resulting in suspensions both on the way down and back up. On Friday, they fell without staging a rebound.

But NYSE executives also said changes made since last year’s chaotic trading were bearing fruit.

“We took a lot of time over the last 10 months looking at where things can be improved and we got the benefit today,” Stacey Cunningham, NYSE’s chief operating officer told the FT.

Among the moves taken on Friday, NYSE Arca widened the ranges, or “collars” that stocks and ETFs can trade from the previous day’s close price to 10 per cent, which led to fewer suspensions. It also widened the collars for securities when they reopen after suspensions, an area where tight bands were cited as a factor in causing suspensions in last August.

NYSE has also eliminated stop orders and its floor brokers provide more pre-opening guidance on shares than they had in the past.

“We did a holistic assessment of the market post August and proposed a number of changes,” Ms Cunningham said. “No single change, but the combination of them, led to a smoother trading day today.”

