B-Day Landing

2016-06-23

Welcome to Thursday’s edition of our daily Brussels Briefing. To receive it every morning in your email in-box, sign up here.

 The bickering will come to a close and a surreal peace will break out on British airwaves during the day due to reporting restrictions for mainstream outlets. Even swings on the markets – some in the City have paid for private exit poll data – will not be analysed in depth. Social media will continue to be a free-for-all for non-journalists, but tread carefully: a clear(ish) picture of what has happened will only start to emerge after midnight as results from across the country trickle in.

The FT has compiled a chronology of what to expect and when. Politics junkies expecting to stay up until there is a clear result be warned: with the polls so tight, a precise result will not be ready until breakfast.

It was not always this close. Cast your mind back to February, when the Remain camp enjoyed a healthy 20 point lead in some telephone polls. That lead has since been shredded.

One poll on the eve of the election gave Remain a comfortable 8 point lead. Others a far squeakier one. In any case, Remain’s fall – and Leave’s rise – has been dramatic. But it has not been unique, when compared to recent voters on the EU in other countries.

The below chart – drawn from the excellent referendum research of academic Ece Özlem Atikcan – demonstrates how the anti-EU camps in six recent referenda across Europe were able to chew up the pro-camp’s lead in the run up to the vote. But only some of them overtook their rivals. Whether Britain joins this French, Dutch and Irish club will be decided today.

BREXIT COMMENTARY

The FT has its final word on Brexit, labelling it a “a grievous act of self harm that would damage not only the UK but Europe and the west”.

Reluctant remainers start to come out of the woodwork, including the FT’s house eurosceptic Sebastian Payne.

Former Daily Telegraph leader writer Robert Colvile follows suit, while worrying about the calibre of people that the UK will have negotiating a new deal.

And Jonathan Hill recounts his personal journey from anti-euro campaigner to European commissioner and his case against political arson.

A punchy call that low turnout for Remain will lead to a win for Brexit from the man who oversaw the successful yes campaign in Scotland’s 1997 referendum.

The eurozone is nearing a do or die moment argues Laurence Boone, former economic adviser to François Hollande.

Politico survey Europe’s malaise and how Brexit killed the status quo. Finally, a superb read on why Brexiters are 500 years behind the times. Just replace Brussels for the break with Rome.

BREXIT FRONTPAGES

It is a big day for Fleet Street. Here is the FT’s front page: And a flavour of the rest pulled together by Nick Sutton: BREXIT POLLS AND CHARTS

A mixed bag of polls on the final day of campaigning:

The FT’s Kate Allen goes through all the reasons to be wary of polls, including the magical herding that tends to occur as the vote nears. The markets seem optimistic about a Remain outcome. Sterling has rallied: And the bookmakers seem confident Britain will vote to stay in the EU, with the probability of Brexit put at around 25 per cent. DOES BREXIT MEAN BREXIT?

“Out is out” Jean-Claude Juncker weighed in on the Brexit referendum the day before polls open, warning: “Out is out.” Although painted as a dramatic last-minute intervention in some quarters, Mr Juncker was simply echoing what other European leaders – such as German finance minister Wolfgang Schaeuble – have been saying for a while: Britain will not get an improved offer.

Out is maybe not out Seasoned EU diplomats are already measuring the wiggle room that exists if Britain votes for leave, according to Alex Barker. “We would be happy to find a way out of the corner that the British have led us into,” says one.

ELSEWHERE IN EUROPE

Bugged Upcoming elections in Spain have been overshadowed by allegations of conspiracy after recordings of the country’s interior minister apparently trying to arrange for his Catalan opponents to be investigated by prosecutors.

Hollande U-turn A pretty humiliating day for French president François Hollande, as he backtracked within a matter of hours on a decision to ban a union protest against his labour reforms.

Turkey blocks German MP Still angered by the Bundestag vote to honour an Armenian genocide, Ankara has stopped a German state secretary visiting German forces at the Incirlik airbase. Note this is a symbolic rebuke: the German forces are still there.

European border farce Member states ducked the chance to hand more power to Brussels, opting for a watered-down deal on the EU’s new border force. Originally, the border guard was meant to have the right to intervene even if a national government opposed it. This plan has been dropped, with governments facing the prospect of neighbours introducing border checks if they do not comply.

