Eastern Europe vulnerable to Brexit fallout

2016-06-24

Emerging market stocks and currencies may have fallen almost in unison on Friday, but analysts were scrambling to assess the likely longer-term impact on EM assets and economies of the UK’s surprise decision to leave the EU.

Eastern Europe is widely seen as the region of the emerging world most exposed to the medium to long-term repercussions of Brexit.

Exports to the UK were equivalent to between 3 per cent and 5 per cent of gross domestic product in Slovakia, the Czech Republic and Hungary last year, which could prove painful if UK imports fell markedly following any Brexit-induced recession.

In Poland, Lithuania and Latvia, exports to the UK were between 2 and 3 per cent of GDP in 2015, according to calculations by Capital Economics.

Peter Attard Montalto, emerging market economist at Nomura, believed the impact of the Brexit vote would be felt most severely in the Czech Republic, where it could reduce economic growth by as much as 0.7 percentage points, followed by Hungary, which could take a hit of 0.5 of a point.

According to Nomura’s calculations, the two countries stand to lose the most from a slowdown in demand in both the UK and the eurozone. 

Turkey and Poland are also seen as more exposed than most, with both countries sending 7.1 per cent of their exports to the UK. 

Poland also receives $1.2bn a year from the UK in the form of remittances, but Mr Attard Montalto said he “discounted” the risk of a meaningful fall in these flows due to the “unlikelihood of anyone being kicked out of the UK”.

Hungary is the next largest recipient of remittances from the UK, receiving $385m last year, according to the World Bank.

Charles Robertson, chief economist at Renaissance Capital, highlighted political risks in Hungary and Poland, which “are both ruled by parties that are anti-immigration and have been clashing with the EU”.

“The EU will have its hands full [with Brexit]. It is less likely to act as a successful restraint on populist gestures from these two governments. This is market unfriendly,” Mr Robertson said. 

Outside Europe, Mr Robertson said Pakistan was potentially exposed to a decline in remittances from an economically weaker UK. However, he foresaw little impact on the bulk of Asia and Latin America, with the latter buoyed by its recent trend away from populism.

Geoff Dennis, strategist at UBS, said Egypt and South Africa were the non-European countries most exposed to a UK economic decline, with more than 4 per cent of their exports going to the UK, largely in the form of tourism revenues.

Among the Bric nations, the UK accounts for 3.3 per cent of India’s exports, 2.6 per cent of those from China, 2.2 per cent from Russia and 1.5 per cent from Brazil, according to UBS.

The listed emerging market companies with greatest exposure to the UK include Netcare, a South African healthcare company that generates 49 per cent of its revenues from the UK, YTL Power International of Malaysia (26.1 per cent of revenues) and Discovery, a South African insurer (21.9 per cent), according to UBS data.

Gareth Leather, senior Asia economist at Capital Economics, argued Asian economies should be largely unaffected, given their low share of exports to the UK (0.7 per cent of GDP on average), large foreign exchange buffers and current account surpluses, enabling them “to ride out even a prolonged period of financial market stress”.

What the vote means for trade, immigration and growth has yet to be determined

The two possible exceptions to this are Indonesia, which runs a current account deficit, and Malaysia, which has a large stock of short-term external debt, Mr Leather said. 

Andres Abadia, senior economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, saw Mexico, Colombia and Brazil as the Latin American countries potentially most exposed to pressures on emerging market currencies and a re-pricing of global risk.

Mr Abadia feared that sustained currency depreciation could further delay a much-needed drop in inflation in Brazil, threatening the ability of the central bank to cut interest rates this year. 

Others argued that there was little reason for EM assets to be hurt by Brexit. 

Michael Harris, global head of research at Renaissance Capital, said: “A lot of risk-off events start as specific crises. In this case we don’t know if it will lead to global recession or whether there will be material shrinkage in UK or European demand, so there is no reason why a single EM country should be attacked.”

Jan Dehn, head of research at Ashmore Investment Management, added: “It’s very difficult to see how this self-inflicted, shoot yourself in the head, economic decision that Britain has taken can have a meaningful effect on EM fundamentals.”

Mr Dehn, who said the impact on EM assets thus far had been “pretty limited” in the grand scheme of things, believed the only meaningful risks stemmed from the strengthening of populists in countries such as Hungary, who may be emboldened by the UK’s decision, and the outside possibility of a run on European banks.

Neil Shearing, chief emerging markets economist at Capital Economics, summed up the mood of many, saying: “While the fallout from the vote is likely to weigh on EM asset prices over the coming days, the direct economic impact on the emerging world is likely to be smaller than many fear”.

