US banks put regulators on notice over Brexit

2016-06-20

US banks have put federal regulators on notice over how they think Britain’s departure from the EU would hit their businesses, in the latest sign large institutions are braced for how such a vote would ripple through the financial system.

Some of the 33 banks taking part in the annual “stress tests” included the risks of a Leave vote for a British exit, or Brexit, in their submissions, according to people with knowledge of the process — even though watchdogs did not require them to.

The Federal Reserve is due to release first round results of its stress tests on Thursday, the day the referendum is held.

Concerns are mounting on Wall Street over the dangers of Brexit. London is a crucial location for several US banks. They use it as a base from which they can access the European single market.

A vote by the UK to quit the EU could knock between 5 per cent and 9 per cent off profits next year at five of the largest US banks, KBW estimated in a report last week.

The analysts cited foreign exchange volatility, uncertainty putting clients off trading and dealmaking, and higher expenses arising from relocation out of London.

Brexit was not among the macro shocks that Fed regulators told banks to envisage when they laid down this year’s “stress scenarios” in January.

Despite Brexit’s absence from the Fed’s mandated tests, the people said some of the banks involved had made it part of a separate hypothetical meltdown that each institution is required to devise itself.

Each bank needs to come up with at least one scenario that causes at least as serious financial difficulties as the toughest test designed by the regulator.

Under the Fed’s “severely adverse” scenario, stock prices drop about 50 per cent, unemployment reaches 10 per cent and gross domestic product declines sharply for five consecutive quarters. The Fed also told banks to model for the first time how their balance sheets would cope with negative interest rates.

Central banks can limit market turmoil, but not long-term damage

The identities of the banks that have modelled for Brexit as part of the stress tests could not be established. The Federal Reserve declined to comment.

The global operations of US banks are tested, as are parts of the American operations of foreign banks. Submissions were made several weeks ago.

The stress tests have become one of the most closely watched annual events by bank investors. Second-round results of the exercise, which banks must pass to be able to increase payouts to shareholders, are due out next week. Banks can fail on qualitative as well as quantitative grounds.

KBW forecast a 9 per cent hit to earnings per share at Morgan Stanley in 2017 arising from Brexit, 8 per cent at Goldman Sachs and 7 per cent at JPMorgan Chase. The analysts estimated a 6 per cent hit at Bank of America and 5 per cent at Citigroup.

They acknowledged the impact “could be devastating or de minimis, depending on how far an investor wants to take the assumptions post Brexit”, but said they made “fairly reasonable assumptions” in coming up with the estimates.

Listen to the podcast: BoE embraces fintech, bankers personalities and US stress tests

