Three former PMs in final appeal against ‘leap in dark’

2016-06-22

Britain’s establishment will on Thursday make a final appeal to a distrustful public to back its judgment and vote for the UK to remain in the EU, as the country confronted its biggest decision in a generation.

The plea by David Cameron and the three living former prime ministers — John Major, Tony Blair and Gordon Brown — caps a campaign that Vote Leave has billed as “the establishment versus the people”.

Few other campaigns have appeared so one-sided. The prime ministers embodied cross-party support for Remain, including most of the Tory cabinet, Labour, Liberal Democrats, Greens, nationalists and trade unionists.

Big business is also overwhelmingly in support — more than 1,200 bosses signed a letter backing Remain on Wednesday — so too is Britain’s economic, science and academic community. Even David Beckham backs Remain.

The British EU referendum will therefore be watched across the world not just for its result but also for what it says about the populist mood sweeping the world. 

Mr Cameron’s team say they are “cautiously optimistic” that Remain will prevail and that voters will put their economic concerns about Brexit ahead of a desire to stick two fingers up to the establishment.

“Risk has kicked in and it’s working in our direction,” said one adviser to Mr Cameron, claiming that recent polling was showing a classic late reversion in a referendum against “a leap in the dark” and towards the status quo.

Privately some of Mr Cameron’s team believe “silent Remainers” will turn out in force on Thursday, just as similarly shy pro-union Scots turned out to reject independence in 2014.

Although polls show the two sides neck-and-neck, the mood in the Cameron camp is transformed from last week, when panic about a possible Leave vote was spreading.

The Remain side is organising a private party to watch the results come in, while the official Vote Leave camp has decided not to stage one. “We decided to spend the £100,000 we might have spent on a party on Facebook ads,” said one Brexit campaigner.

The Vote Leave campaign stalled following the death of the Labour MP Jo Cox — political activity was suspended for 72 hours — and has failed to pick up momentum since then. But the Brexit side believes the result will be close.

Nobody at Westminster is convinced the polls are any more correct now than they were at the 2015 general election and turnout will also play a crucial role.

Remain campaigners are hoping for a high turnout of about 70 per cent, which is deemed to be helpful to the In side. But weather forecasts predict thunderstorms for London — the heart of Remain support — during the day.

Differential turnout will also be key. Much will depend on whether the Leave side have managed to galvanise working class voters, particularly in the north, to go to the polling stations.

This group of voters generally fails to vote in large numbers, but the Leave campaign has encouraged them to record their disquiet with the status quo, manifested by frustration at high levels of immigration.

Although the establishment has broadly lined up behind Remain, the “people’s revolt” has been led by two “outsiders” with impeccable establishment credentials.

Boris Johnson (Eton, Oxford) and Nigel Farage (Dulwich College, pinstriped City trader) have appealed to Britain’s underdogs by being prepared — like Donald Trump — to speak “truths” to power on issues such as immigration.

They have been abetted by a strongly anti-European press, which has stirred the idea that the people are being lied to by a self-interested elite.

The Sun printed a large picture of Mr Cameron on Wednesday urging readers to “Look into his eyes”, before advising them not to trust the prime minister on his ability to curb immigration and to reform the EU.

Campaigners on both sides concede the EU referendum is a battle between hearts and heads. The country might yearn to give Brussels and the establishment a kick, but is it still listening to the warnings from a largely united but tarnished elite?

