Ruth Davidson was the star of the final EU debate

2016-06-21

Tuesday evening saw the final TV debate of the EU referendum campaign and there was a clear winner: Ruth Davidson. The leader of the Scottish Conservatives has been absent from the national campaign and her late arrival has injected some much-needed mojo into the pro-EU cause. Ms Davidson, with her combative campaigning and debating style, is well-liked in political circles north of the border — now the rest of the country was able to witness it. She did what David Cameron has struggled to do: appear genuinely pumped up about voting In and make people feel good about it. 

In fact, the new Remain team upped its game for the BBC debate after last week’s ITV show. Sadiq Khan, the new mayor of London, was as combative as Ms Davidson and happily locked horns with his predecessor, Boris Johnson. He snappily lambasted Vote Leave’s campaign as “project hate”. 

Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the TUC, appeared nervous at times but delivered some key messages targeted at Brexit Labour voters — something Jeremy Corbyn should have done earlier in the campaign. 

Instead of dodging the immigration question, they were able to properly counter it for the first time, with a solid argument about the benefits migration brings to the economy.

And Team Remain finally discovered a sound bite — Vote Leave has “a slogan but no plan” — to play on voters’ uncertainties about leaving. 

Vote Leave confronted the Wembley Arena audience with the same team as the ITV debate. Mr Johnson was joined again by Conservative MP Andrea Leadsom and Labour’s Gisela Stuart and, just as before, they were resolutely focused on the “vote leave, take back control” message. It was a reassuring turn, designed to halt the flow of undecided voters to Remain. 

Campaign members were particularly pleased that Team Remain decided to introduce Turkish accession to the debate, a move that, they said, came back to hit them like a “boomerang in the head”. It was certainly unwise of Mr Khan to give Vote Leave’s Turkey leaflet airtime by holding it up on stage.

But at this late stage in the campaign, it is questionable how many undecided voters will be won over by such grandiose bickering. Ms Davidson’s impassioned defence of Britain’s EU membership will give Remain voters a reason to go to the polling station on Thursday, while Mr Johnson’s solid turn offered affirmation to Brexiters. 

Although neither team suffered any major mishaps, it was a better night for Remain — if only based on the personalities and momentum. In 48 hours, we will see if it was enough to push them over the line.

sebastian.payne@ft.com

