Week Ahead Political Diary: Final days of UK’s EU vote campaign

2016-06-19

The EU referendum is in its final week with a definitive shift in the polls towards Britain to leave.

The game is not up for those wanting to remain in the EU and chancellor George Osborne is doubling down on his strategy of warning that Brexit brings dire economic consequences. 

Trading blows with the Leave campaign on who to trust and the interests of elites, the chancellor now says that there would be such a big hole in the public finances after leaving the EU there would have to be an emergency Budget to raise tax and cut spending. 

Vote Remain or you’ll feel it in your pocket is the new message.

So far these warnings have not been taken on board by an electorate unwilling to trust experts who think he is scaremongering, partly to save his own skin. Having said that leaving the EU would be “economically illiterate”, it is difficult to see the chancellor being in his current job after a vote for Brexit. 

The Bank of England, meanwhile, is on alert to deal with the immediate consequences of Brexit. Mark Carney, governor, will send out a message of reassurance after a leave vote and the BoE is already mobilised to ensure banks are safe even if financial market turmoil follows the referendum. 

The BoE does not think it can smooth all financial or economic volatility, however, expects a “sharp” fall in sterling and is unsure whether it is more likely to raise interest rates to offset inflationary forces of more expensive imports or deflationary forces of a weaker economy. 

In the remaining days before the referendum, the stakes could not be higher for the politicians involved, officials that have to deal with the immediate fallout and the prosperity of British households, since no one knows the exact economic implications of Brexit. 

Military exercise ‘Sabre Strike’ involving 10,000 personnel from 13 countries in the Baltic states ends on Wednesday. The exercise was designed to practice the speedy response of new rapid-reaction forces in eastern Europe.

The objective is to improve joint operational capabilities between Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania preparing with armed forces from Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Luxembourg, Norway, Poland, Slovenia, the UK and the US.

The exercise has been organised since 2010 by US Army Europe. As a warm-up to live fire, command and electronic warfare exercises, the US Army 2nd Cavalry Regiment joined German, Polish and Latvian soldiers for a tactical 2,400km “vehicle road march” which started on May 27.

Split into two columns, the 1,400 soldiers and 400 vehicles left Rose Barracks in Germany for Tapa in Estonia, making two river crossings, one across the Naab river near Weiden an der Oberpfalz, Germany, with German soldiers on June 1, and the other, with Polish soldiers, across the Vistula near Torun in Poland. 

Sabre Strike is one of a series of military exercises running in eastern Europe during June. These exercises come before the 27th Nato summit on July 8-9 in Warsaw. Among the main objectives of the summit are assessing Nato’s relations with Russia.

The four-day International Association for Applied Econometrics Conference starts on Wednesday at the University of Milano-Bicocca in Italy. 

IAAE’s main aims are public education in econometrics and application of its techniques to a variety of fields in economics by advancing and supporting research, and disseminating research to the public. 

The IAAE conference brings together leading researchers and is a major forum where all aspects of theory and practice are debated.

‘Data and Development’ is the theme of the The Annual Bank Conference on Development Economics, in Washington DC on Monday and Tuesday.

The conference, organised by the World Bank, promotes exchange of leading research among academics, policymakers and development practitioners.

The Economic Council of the German Christian Democratic Union is to hold a business forum in Berlin on Tuesday.

The theme is ‘Europe in the new era’, and speakers are expected to include German chancellor, Angela Merkel, the chairman of the euro group, Jeroen Dijsselbloem, former French president, Nicolas Sarkozy, and chief executive of Deutsche Bank, John Cryan. 

