Super-rich pledge to stay in Britain after Brexit vote

2016-06-24

The UK’s wealthy have pledged to remain in Britain in the wake of the decision to leave the EU, despite growing fears that the referendum result will dent London’s position as the world’s centre for international wealth. 

Sheikh Mohamed Bin Issa Al Jaber, the UK’s 15th-richest person with just under £6bn, according to the Sunday Times Rich List, said the UK capital was a model of “transparency and accountability” and remained his first choice.

“The future will show that Britain is a market which is difficult to replace,” he said. Compared with other European — or global — capitals, the advantage remained in London’s favour, he said. 

“I know there will be changes and people will need to accommodate them, but Britain, and London in particular, remains the capital market of the world, and that will not be changed.”

However, for many of the UK’s wealthy, questions remain about London’s attractiveness for the globe-trotting super-rich. 

“ Does this make London less attractive? Most definitely,” said entrepreneur and angel investor, Gi Fernando. 

“This incentivises me to invest more of my asset base into tech start-ups with young people who have proved they have a global and connected view. [This] seems less risky than markets controlled by people of the age who predominantly voted Leave and seem more disconnected from the view of future consumers than ever.”

Britain has prospered inside the EU but it will not do as well outside.Read on

But Joe Fournier, a Monaco-born multimillionaire and owner of the Bonbonniere nightclubs, said the decision might actually make the UK more attractive to smaller start-ups. “We were already on a downturn over the past 12 months,” he said. “The luxury and property market were stagnant. This shakes things up a bit, gives the lesser guys a chance to get going and gives some of the entrepreneurs like me who have a bit of cash reserve to get a better deal on things.”

Others expressed concern that Brexit might hit philanthropy in the UK, with personal fortunes and charitable endowments suffering from the dip in the pound. 

“Firstly, whatever assets we’ve got have fallen in value, so I’ve got less value now in the charity,” said Richard Ross, philanthropist and chairman of the Rosetrees Foundation, which funds medical research. “Secondly, the income might fall.”

However, Mr Ross — who has committed himself to giving away £100m in his lifetime — said the move towards Brexit would not alter his personal charitable giving. “We’ve allocated the money, and we’re going to spend it,” he said. 

Bill Holroyd, chairman and founder of OnSide Youth Zones, a national charity for young people, also brushed aside the referendum result. Mr Holroyd, who made £60m from the sale of Appliances Online, the online retailer of fridges and washing machines, said he had no plans to leave the country. 

“Definitely not,” he said. “We could have lived anywhere in the world, and we love this country. I just hope [the UK doesn’t] lose out too badly economically.

“But no, it won’t alter my Britishness, where I keep my wealth and where I conduct my philanthropy. Not at all, not one jot.”

