Lombard live: Day of beer, bungee markets and burning platforms

2016-06-24

Lombard, the FT’s daily column on City and UK business news, is providing a running commentary on the Leave vote in the EU referendum alongside a more considered view here.

4.40pm Time for a pint

Tim Martin, head of pubs chain JD Wetherspoon and vocal Brexiter, may rue the triumphalism of his early morning chat with Lombard. Shares in his pub chain were down 7 per cent-plus at one stage. That cost Mr Martin, owner of nearly 30 per cent of the group, about £20m — hardly small beer. KB

4.30pm Pension pain

Amid the turmoil, grave predictions and gnashing of teeth post-referendum, there have been warnings about pensions. 

This is perhaps not at the top of most people’s lists of immediate Brexit worries. These are payments that will have to be made decades after exit is achieved (however long that takes). But it is a problem that has got worse in the past 24 hours because of market movements.

Pensions adviser Hymans Robertson says that the hole in UK corporate defined benefit (DB) pension funding has increased from £820bn yesterday to £900bn off the back of the referendum result. UK DB liabilities have now reached £2.2tn. 

Rising interest rates would help to reduce those liabilities, but given the uncertainty of the next few years, that is not likely to happen for a while. So executives at corporate UK are probably going to have to live with the higher liabilities and either deal with them by increasing their pension contributions or (more likely) leave them for later generations of managers to deal with. 

Not a happy thought, but it is one more thing for bemused legions of City workers to fret over as they head to the pub. OR

3.50pm A merger marathon

Chatter is mounting that a deal trumpeted as the great symbol of European integration — the proposed merger of Deutsche Börse and the London Stock Exchange — cannot possibly go ahead given the turmoil triggered by the Brexit vote.

The odd thing is that Carsten Kengeter, Deutsche Börse’s extreme-sportsman chief executive, was reckoned to have launched his bid for the LSE back in February, specifically because of the upcoming Brexit vote. The prospect of the referendum would spook rival bidders, leaving the way clear for the German exchange group. So went the theory.

Indeed no rival bid came. But getting through the coming months with the deal intact is going to be make Mr Kengeter long for the simplicity of his favourite hobby — running marathons in the Mont Blanc massif.

First, he must placate excitable German politicians, particularly those in Deutsche Börse’s home region of Hessen, where there are likely to be calls for the combined group’s HQ to be switched from London to Frankfurt.

Second, he must meet the likely demands of the European Central Bank that euro-denominated trades — a large chunk of the LSE’s current business mix — be cleared inside the EU, not in London.

Both issues threaten to upset the delicate balance of power between Deutsche Börse and the LSE, potentially thwarting a deal. Also a threat is the fact that this deal no longer looks very much like a merger of equals — an important face-saving optic in the proposed transaction. The diverging share prices of the two groups, and an implied premium rapidly approaching 10 per cent, mean the deal could soon look like a German takeover. If the policymakers don’t kill this deal, vanity — stoked by Britain’s bubbling xenophobia — could well do so instead. PJ

1.25pm Not waving, drowning

As proud soon-not-to-be leader of a seafaring nation, David Cameron and his midshipmen were bound to tack towards the nautical as they scrambled for a metaphor to sum up his reasons for casting off from the premiership: “I will do everything I can as prime minister to steady the ship over the coming weeks and months,” he said, “but I do not think it would be right for me to try to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination.”

Mr Cameron was echoing generations of captains of industry who invoke the sea and ships to demonstrate their own authoritative helmsmanship, inspire or reassure passengers and crew, and, in the event of disaster, to bolster their excuses for having sunk. 

In 2011, Stephen Elop, after taking over as chief executive of Nokia, wrote the famous “burning platform” memo to inspire his staff, picturing a man on a blazing oil rig: “In ordinary circumstances, the man would never consider plunging into icy waters. But these were not ordinary times” and so on. Mr Elop was himself swallowed by the deep two-and-a-half years later after Nokia sold its devices business to Microsoft.

Sepp Blatter, then head of Fifa, and Dick Fuld, former chief executive of Lehman Brothers, pointed out last year that storms (in Mr Fuld’s case, the inevitable “perfect storm”) had driven them off course even as they tried to pilot their ailing organisations to safety. 

And the maritime metaphor inspired a whole episode of the US edition of The Office, in which chief executive Michael Scott stages a “booze cruise” for his team and dons a fancy-dress captain’s cap to explain why: “Leader — ship. The word ‘ship’ is hidden inside the word ‘leadership’, as its derivation. So if this office is, in fact, a ship, as its leader, I am the captain. But we’re all in the same boat. Teamwork!”

Pity Mr Cameron: he was speaking after a sleepless night when it became clear he had shipwrecked his own project and ambitions. He may be forgiven his resort to cliché. But he might have done better to channel newly knighted crooner Sir Roderick Stewart, now we are all “sailing stormy waters, to be near you, to be free”. As Rod concludes: “Oh Lord, to be near you, to be free”. No captain, no clear destination: oh Lord, indeed.

1pm: Dirty MAC brigade

The Brexit vote gives businesses a good reason, or perhaps excuse, to pull out of deals they have not inked yet. Would-be acquirer of British businesses Steinhoff has hinted it may not proceed with an approach for Poundland, or One Pound Seventy Eight Pence Land, as we should perhaps call it after a 13 per cent fall in the shares this morning.

The South Africa-rooted group says the impact of the referendum on global markets is one reason it is “considering its position”. 

Steinhoff previously failed to buy Home Retail Group and then Darty. So it may be becoming something of a frequent flyer in flunking deals. The company cites Poundland’s weak full-year results as well as Brexit, though.

Some of Lombard’s more excitable colleagues on rival papers have suggested the Brexit vote could allow acquirers to withdraw from transactions they have already agreed, under so-called “material adverse change” clauses. 

That may prove to be a faint hope, unless the referendum was specifically cited in documents.

The grey-cowled elders of the Takeover Panel, the City’s M&A regulator, are strict about such things. They refused a request from arch-dealmaker Sir Martin Sorrell to pull out of the purchase of Tempus by his advertising group WPP in the wake of the dotbomb market collapse in 2001. JG

12.05pm: Sage advice

Accounting software group Sage claims it is the champion for small and medium-sized businesses. “We want to reassure entrepreneurs that we will support them today, tomorrow and for whatever the future holds — because there’s no doubt that whatever the pace of an exit from the EU, it will change the way we do business”. 

More helpfully, the company, run by former civil servant Stephen Kelly, has put out a list of examples of likely changes. It will strike gloom into the hearts of most entrepreneurs. Regulations that could be reworked include the rules on trade, recruitment and VAT reporting. 

The latter burden will increase, particularly if short-term trading agreements are reached that would cut in following a Brexit. Then there is the issue of product labelling, says Sage. But don’t worry, Sage is there to help. Oh good.

There is one upside to Brexit, overlooked by Sage. Brits might eventually be able to thumb their noses at EU rulemakers who currently decide who has the right to badge foods beloved by the nation, whether it is Cheddar, Stilton or English champagne, er . . . sparkling wine. Nor will the Eurocrats be able to interfere with grocers selling bananas that lack the right degree of curvature, as tabloids have claimed they did in the past. KB

11.50: Base case base jumping

Understatement of the day so far comes from one of Citi’s analysts: “The result is not in-line with Citi’s base case.”

The consensus appears to be that this is bad for banks. How bad? Lloyds shares are off 22 per cent; RBS and Barclays both off 19 per cent; HSBC holding up just 4 per cent lower. 

The ways in which the Brexit vote is bad will only become clear in the coming weeks and months. There are hundreds of possibles. Take your pick from this (non-exhaustive) list:

— general economic weakness

— jobs moving overseas

— falling property prices

— higher funding costs

— loss of access to EU markets

— wild financial markets

— customer nerves

— depressed M&A activity

Still, we shouldn’t worry too much, right? We’ve had eight years of rulemaking since the financial crisis, with regulators adding buffer after buffer to banks’ capital levels. If they have achieved anything at all, then the coming years of uncertainty should not threaten banks’ existence as the 2008 crisis did. 

What it will do, perhaps, is provide yet more years in which they struggle to break even, more years of restructuring (and the associated exceptional charges) and more years of questions and navel gazing about what banks are actually for. 

That’s really something to look forward to. OR

11.30am: Canary down a mine 

London landlords are preparing for a nail-biting wait to see whether banks were making empty threats when they pledged to move some operations to the continent. Canary Wharf, the towering home of international banks (for now) — is heavily exposed thanks to tenants such as JPMorgan, Morgan Stanley and Citigroup, which use London HQs there as launch pads for the rest of Europe. Professional services firm PwC reckons that overseas banks that utilise the UK as a base for accessing the EU market employ around 115,000 staff. 

As these banks warned in the run-up to the referendum, they might look to move jobs out of London in the event of an Brexit. They’ll be weighing up their operations in the UK — and eyeing Paris, Frankfurt, Amsterdam and Dublin as alternatives. 

Sir George Iacobescu, the chairman and chief executive officer of Canary Wharf Group, says the next few months will be critical. “There will be a period of reassessment for the property market. It will have to follow what demand is on both the office and residential side.” 

The Jubilee line was packed this morning when I ventured to the Wharf. For how much longer will it stay that way? HA

11.15am: Every crisis brings its sales opportunity. 

Prime Central London, the Marylebone-based real estate investment advisers, says there will be a rush of buyers for top quality London property. Apparently, LCP has already received a stream of inquiries since the early hours from foreign buyers, notably in Asia and the Middle East. For this reason the company has decided to make a second share offering for its quoted London Central Apartments fund invested in the rental market. 

How kind. London property prices have been a bit soft recently but LCP says Brexit is just what the market needed. Property is less volatile than financial markets after all, says LCP. More like gold prices, which are up 5 per cent. The fall in sterling is helping. The company must have been planning this bout of generosity for a while. What would its rationale have been if the vote had been to remain in EU? Presumably it would have talked about London’s strong position at the heart of Europe. KB

10.45am: Solvency II’s acid test

Call in Corporal Jones of TV sitcom Dad’s Army, or perhaps Arthur Dent of The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy. As the insurance and pensions world scrabbles around for something meaningful to say this morning, what pundits are universally arriving at is “Don’t panic!”

Here’s Royal London’s Steve Webb on what savers should do: “Consumers who are concerned about their pensions and investments should take informed, impartial financial advice and avoid making knee-jerk decisions.”

And here’s the Association of British Insurers: “Customers should remember we remain part of the EU until the process of leaving is complete and they should therefore avoid making hasty decisions about their financial matters.”

Elsewhere, reaction so far is a combination of “heads down, we’ve been planning for this,” and “the insurance industry has been through this sort of thing before and survived”. 

Ironically, the vote and its repercussions will be the first real test of the EU’s new Solvency II capital regime, which came into force at the start of the year. If the industry survives a Brexit relatively unscathed, it will be a huge victory for Solvency II. A shame, then, that after a Brexit the standard would no longer apply to the UK’s insurers. 

One place London’s insurance community should avoid looking for reassurance is the stock market. It’s a bloodbath at pixel time — Legal & General and Aviva down 17 per cent, Standard Life down 16 per cent, Prudential Plc down 10 per cent. OR

10.20am: A hand brake turn from business

There has been a grinding of teeth and gears from big businesses, as they respond to the Leave vote. Many bosses were signatories to letters warning of economic disaster in the event of a Brexit. Their task now is to project an aura of unflappable calm and suggest their company will emerge unscathed from the maelstrom.

For instance, the doughty Dame Carolyn McCall, chief executive of easyJet, was recently quoted in the Daily Mail predicting a Brexit would push flying back to the era when it was “reserved for elite”.

That wouldn’t be great news for a low-cost airline. This morning, easyJet was shedding its couture hat and white gloves to state that it “is confident [the result] will not have a material impact on its strategy or its ability to deliver long term sustainable earnings growth and returns to shareholders.”

Given the lack of consistency in business’s message, a blazer-clad populist would argue it is no surprise the prognostications of bosses were ignored by many Britons.

You might interpret the vote as splitting the country into those whose beliefs are determined by economics and another, ultimately more powerful group, whose economics are determined by their beliefs.

The news that some Mayfair hedge fund managers are upset by the Brexit poll result is meanwhile unlikely to evoke much empathy in Middlesbrough or Ebbw Vale.

Harriet Agnew, the FT’s very own City Insider, reports:

“Across Mayfair, hedge fund managers reacted in disbelief. Many of them had gone to bed at 11pm, believing that Remain would triumph. One prominent Mayfair hedgie said: “I didn’t sleep at all last night, I was watching it unfold on television and trading S&P futures. It was a surprise. It’s bad. There is a lot of money being lost today in the City. Levels of adrenalin are very high everywhere. We don’t realise what it means yet. It’s a very complex event. This is just the beginning.”

Harriet’s contact referred to the vote as a “Lehmans-style event”, just like a senior banker Lombard spoke too earlier. That kind of meltdown is at the outside edge of probability. The world financial system has been heftily bolstered since the financial crisis and this morning’s outcome is hardly a black swan. It more closely resembles the parrot that fell down Lombard’s chimney a few weeks ago and flew around the house, panicking and relieving itself on the soft furnishings. JG

9am: Elvis is leaving the building

David Cameron has made a terrible hash of his departure. It’s hard to believe he used to be a PR man for Carlton Television. In saying the country needs “fresh leadership”, he has essentially admitted he’s not up to the job on the morning of a massive profits warning. You don’t get that in the corporate sector.

If the prime minister’s resignation had been handled by a competent firm of City PRs, a nebulous statement would have referred to him “stepping down to pursue other interests”. Spinners would then have privately told journalists Mr Cameron “had always intended” to leave after six years, a proviso curiously absent from the written record. It might only emerge he’d been forced out when the annual report was published months later.

Mr Cameron could follow Tony Blair’s path by setting up a political consultancy. He does not have the former labour PM’s vulpine charisma or enjoy the adulation in some parts of the world that comes from taking the UK to war under a false premise. But there would still be plenty of companies and single party states out there willing to pay top dollar for advice. Mr Blair reportedly made a $1m fee for less than three hours’ work helping win Qatar’s support for Glencore’s $30bn takeover of miner Xstrata in 2012.

Lombard has met Mr Cameron only once, placed beside him, to his barely-concealed horror, at a black-tie dinner in Birmingham. I asked him a couple of times whether he would clamp down on tax breaks for private equity, which was then a topic of the day. He promised to answer in detail after his speech, walked to the lectern, delivered his speech, then walked straight out of the room, got into his official car and zoomed back to London. JG

8.35am: A dead cat with little bounce

The FTSE 100 has fallen 6.5 per cent, rallying from a low of 8.5 per cent earlier. Morgan Stanley had been forecasting a 15-20 per cent drop before the vote. FTSE 100 companies make about 80 per cent of their earnings outside the UK, but this isn’t proving much of a buffer at present.

We will be in a risk-on/risk-off market for a while, with the emphasis on the risk-off bit. It will be interesting to see where New York opens. In previous bouts of volatility, London has taken its cue from Hong Kong in the morning and New York in the afternoon. Perhaps, on this day of days, the tail will wag the dog.

Sterling collapsed 18 cents, the biggest fall in living memory. This is a tiny bit ironic, given that Ukip’s emblem incorporates a pound sign. One of the catchphrases of The Pub Landlord, the Little Englander persona of comedian Al Murray, is: “sahnd as an English pahnd”. He also labours under the misapprehension that if women work, they should only do so as nurses or secretaries.

In theory a weaker pound is good for exporters. Global financial turmoil is not, however. JG

7.45am: Beer and salmon for triumphant Brexit breakfast?

I had a quick chat earlier with Tim Martin, chairman of pubs chain JD Wetherspoon and a prominent Leave campaigner. Mr Martin described this jokingly as his “first triumphalist phone call of the day”, as he’d just woken up. He was naturally delighted by the Out vote, which he described as a victory for democracy.

He reckoned the Remain campaign and its business supporters had spawned “too many slogans that talked down to people”. That seems like a fair judgment. I suspect there is a fair degree of symmetry between how Mr Martin sees the world and the views of drinkers at his pubs, whose patrons include Britons on modest incomes.

On my way to work, I was accosted by an ex-services Big Issue seller, a fellow commuter and a security guard all of whom were delighted with the vote. There is a sense this morning that the electorate has stuck one to the man, not least the leaders of big business.

There is a slew of official business reaction to the vote, including an eye-catching prediction from brokerage T Rowe Price that “this could lead to a global recession”. That has been the unofficial view of many in the City I have spoken to in the last week.

The Bank of England has said it “will take all necessary steps to meet its responsibilities for monetary and financial stability”. This is pretty predictable, given the volatility of sterling. We should probably be grateful the Old Lady has not stated she is “lying on the floor and sobbing uncontrollably”.

I can’t help wondering what happened to the dead salmon Boris Johnson was recently pictured (almost) kissing at Billingsgate market, perhaps in memory of long-ago Bullingdon Club revels. The fishmonger should be able to sell it a premium price to a Leave camp celebration party. Alternatively, artist Damien Hirst could suspend it in a tank of formalin like one of his sharks, with the title: “The Impossibility of a Brexit Vote in the Mind of a Complacent Prime Minister”. JG

jonathan.guthrie@ft.com

