Few bright spots in UK traders’ sea of red

2016-06-24

As a sea of red swept across City traders’ screens on Friday, investors took refuge in the few stocks with sufficient exposure to overseas currencies or gold to be able to ride out the Brexit financial storm.

Some were also making money amid the misery, with Crispin Odey, a prominent hedge fund manager, claiming his portfolio had gained about 15 per cent on Friday morning because he had shorted the UK stock market heading into the referendum vote.

Otherwise, traditional institutional investors sought to take long positions in companies better placed to withstand the impact of the collapsing pound — and in particular those linked to the swiftly rising price of gold. 

On Friday morning, the highest risers were two gold and precious metals mining groups: Mexico-based Fresnillo and Randgold Resources. However, there was a broader move to defensive stocks in the pharmaceuticals and more global consumer sectors.

Only 15 of the top 350 listed companies in the UK were trading higher on Friday morning, with the FTSE 100 sinking sharply before paring back its losses to trade 4 per cent lower at midday.

Gold miners’ shares soared on the back of the metal’s traditional status as a haven from economic turmoil. As the gold price rose more than 4 per cent to more than $1,300 per ounce, shares in Randgold Resources, the largest UK-listed gold miner, initially climbed nearly 30 per cent. 

By mid-morning, the Randgold shares were 17 per cent higher, while Acacia Mining was up 15 per cent, and Fresnillo, the UK’s largest silver and gold miner, rose 12 per cent.

“We expect gold to continue its move up to $1,400 per ounce,” said commodity analysts at Société Générale.

Shares in pharmaceutical companies AstraZeneca and GlaxoSmithKline, and those in Mediclinic, the international healthcare group, all rose in morning trading as investors sought companies that sold products overseas and generated much of their earnings in currencies strengthening against sterling.

Arm Holdings, the chip designer that makes more than 95 per cent of its sales in dollars, global drinks can maker Rexam, and Rolls-Royce — which generates two-thirds of revenue and three quarters of its orders outside Europe — were the only other FTSE 100 stocks to rise on Friday.

Rolls said its short-term outlook will not be affected, but any long-term impact “will depend upon the relationships that are established between the UK, the EU and the rest of the world over the coming years”.

Other companies with a higher proportion of euro or dollar earnings also performed better than most, such as Vodafone, a mainly European telecoms group that only generates about 10 per cent of its earnings in the UK and pays a dividend in euros. 

Global consumer goods groups, such as Unilever, also fared better. 

Only six stocks in the FTSE 250 rose in price on Friday morning — again mainly those in the mining industry but also investment trusts investing in North America and China. 

