Brexit countdown: 3 days to go

2016-06-19

Cheap rhetoric — and holidays

After the suspension of campaigning in the wake of Jo Cox’s murder, politics is back, like a leaking tap that you thought had stopped. Andrew Lilico, a thoughtful pro-Brexit economist, kicked things off on Twitter — saying that if Remain were to win due to “a Cox-related backlash, having trailed so badly, how could a second referendum be avoided?” Nigel Farage then irked many Sunday TV viewers, arguing “we did have momentum until this terrible tragedy”.

On the lighter side, one businessman told a Vote Leave rally that Brexit would make holidays cheaper — by hitting the euro. Lance Forman, owner of salmon smokery H Forman & Son, has previously complained that EU rules mean he has to badge his salmon as “contains fish”. That is true: fish is an allergen, and must be listed as an ingredient.

One man not at the rally was Michael Crick, the Channel 4 journalist who specialises in irritating politicians. He claims he was banned because he “took the piss” at past events. Vote Leave’s security team have taken back control.

Turnout indicators

The BBC is predicting warm, if mixed, weather on Thursday. There are no Euro 2016 fixtures on the day.

Fleet Street endorsements

Leave — Sun, Sun on Sunday, Sunday Times, Daily Express, Sunday Express, Sunday Telegraph, Spectator.

Remain — Financial Times, Times, Economist, Observer, Sunday Mirror, Sunday People, Mail on Sunday.

Undeclared — Daily Mail and Daily Telegraph (likely Leave); Guardian and Daily Mirror (Remain).

The FT’s guide to the UK’s EU referendum

Newspapers tend to align with their readers. In last year’s general election only the Independent did not; it backed the coalition, when readers favoured Labour. Hence, as long ago as February, Downing Street thought the Sun would back Leave, and the Times would back Remain. For David Cameron, the unwelcome surprise has been the virulence of anti-EU coverage in the Mail and the Telegraph, both of whose owners are thought to lean towards Remain. The papers’ endorsements may be less influential than their news coverage over the past four months.

Sir Richard Branson

The Virgin founder wants Britain to stay in the EU. “I am one of a rare breed of business people still going who can remember what it was like before the European Union was formed. When I took my first steps in business in the 1960s and ’70s, trade and travel were a drag,” he wrote in the Mail on Sunday.

It is decent fare, and shows that Sir Richard would probably have made a more convincing chair of the Remain campaign than Stuart Rose. A challenge might have been posed, though, by the fact that Sir Richard, now based on Necker island in the Caribbean, can only spend a certain number of days each year in the UK.

