Ireland: Too many houses in the wrong place

2016-06-21

When Shane and Maria Bradshaw bought their four-bedroom house in Adamstown in the western suburbs of Dublin in 2009, they were attracted to the neighbourhood in part by an alluring sales brochure. It showed a newly planned town — the first in Ireland for 50 years — with a projected population of about 25,000, within easy commuting distance of the city and a high street lined with shops, restaurants and a cinema.

Seven years later, that glossy brochure offers a picture not so much of a suburban dream as a national nightmare. As Ireland grapples with the legacy of its financial crisis, the country’s housebuilding industry, which fuelled much of the unsustainable later period of its Celtic Tiger economic boom, has ground to a halt. Only 15 per cent of Adamstown’s planned 10,000 homes have been built. Its 3,000 or so residents are surrounded by fenced-off fields where houses were by now supposed to be. The train station linking the town to central Dublin is eerily underused. And the Bradshaws are still waiting for their high street.

Mr Bradshaw remains optimistic. “We’re not asking for any extras, just what they promised us,” says the 32-year-old financial analyst.

Adamstown is one of many housing developments that stand unfinished, or unstarted, as the Irish survey their post-crisis landscape. 

A decade ago, Ireland was building many more homes than its demographic trends warranted: 90,000 a year at the peak of its building boom in 2006. Now, through a mix of policy paralysis, a broken construction industry, a scarcity of development finance, and changing home-ownership and demographic trends, it is facing the most severe housing crisis in its modern history. Last year fewer than 13,000 new homes were built, while demand is running at 25,000 a year, the majority of it in the capital Dublin.

In a twist worthy of the Irish comic writer Flann O’Brien, the enduring legacy of a financial crash caused by a debt-fuelled boom in home construction is an acute shortage of homes. Moreover, it is happening in a country that has 230,000 vacant homes. Some are in “ghost estates” in far-flung towns where few Irish people now wish to live — if they ever did. Even some of the half-finished developments can feel ghostly. As Karl Whitney, who has written a book about post-crisis Dublin, observes, though these areas are connected to the city by trains, “that makes them feel even more isolated. They have an almost frontier-town atmosphere.”

Ireland is not the only EU country facing a housing shortage. The UK is also not building enough homes and there are shortages in cities such as Berlin. The problem in Ireland is, however, more acute and poses a major challenge to the minority centre-right government. 

“It is an absolute priority for the government,” says Simon Coveney, the housing minister, who describes the problem as a national emergency. So seriously do officials take the issue that, in an assessment this month of the strategic risks facing Ireland, housing was mentioned 16 times. That compares to 13 mentions for Brexit— the prospect that the UK might leave the EU after Thursday’s referendum — and three for terrorism.

The alarm is understandable: the housing shortage poses a direct threat to Ireland’s strong but unevenly distributed economic recovery. Its economy has been the fastest-growing in the eurozone for the past two years; in 2015 it expanded by nearly 8 per cent. Yet there are warnings that the country’s attraction for foreign direct investment, the main driver of growth, is being undermined. 

The fear is that the US technology companies that have made Dublin a key outpost of Silicon Valley, providing thousands of well-paid jobs, will invest elsewhere if they cannot promise their employees the high-quality accommodation that is so scarce in Irish cities but is readily available elsewhere in Europe.

The Irish have always been good at building houses. Now, their puzzling inability to put one brick on top of another has exposed longstanding flaws in Ireland’s approach to construction, infrastructure, housing, planning and property ownership.

Experts agree that the housing shortage is the logical culmination of years of poor planning and perverse incentives to build in places where there was never likely to be demand. They also question the wisdom of encouraging an owner-occupier housing model that may no longer be suitable to meet the changing demands of a society that is modernising more rapidly than official Ireland appears to appreciate.

“It’s a huge systemic failure,” says Ronan Lyons, an academic at Dublin’s Trinity College who has studied generations of Irish housing policy.

 A visible consequence of the crisis is a rise in homelessness as some families find themselves unable to pay their mortgages or rent. A report by a cross-party committee of MPs last week says there are over 1,000 homeless families in Ireland today, compared with 400 at the beginning of last year. 

The Simon Communities, which lobby for homeless people, told parliament’s housing committee that “it is impacting on every region and community across the country”. Yet the diffuse nature of the problem is, if anything, making the policy response more difficult, in part because the crisis is so unexpected.

When Ireland was tumbling into recession after the 2008 collapse of its banking and construction industries, the fear was that the legacy of the bust would be the return of forced emigration: young Irish people fleeing the country, retracing the steps of hundreds of thousands of their ancestors in search of better opportunities abroad. Or it would be high long-term unemployment, as the construction and financial industries laid off tens of thousands.

These fears have not materialised. Nominal Irish gross domestic product now exceeds the highest level it reached during the Celtic Tiger era. Annual output is now a shade over €200bn. Emigration is slowing or reversing. 

Unemployment is also falling, from a peak of 15 per cent at the height of the crisis to 8.4 per cent now. Yet these positive developments are occurring almost in a parallel country with the housing crisis providing the greatest example of the unevenly distributed fruits of recovery.

Addressing Ireland’s housing problem will not be easy. For starters, it is not as simple as placing the estimated 90,000 families on national waiting lists for social housing into vacant homes. 

According to the Housing Agency, a government body created in 2010, only about a fifth of empty properties are in Dublin and many of those are uninhabitable. 

Yet this is where demand is greatest: Prof Lyons says the population of Dublin will rise by 100,000 households in the decade to 2020, yet only 15,000 homes have been built in the city since 2010. 

Much of the remainder are in sparsely populated counties such as Leitrim, 175km north-west of Dublin. The glut there is the result of tax incentives lavished on the construction industry during the mid-2000s to keep property transactions, on which tax revenues were heavily dependent, ticking over.

This mismatch between oversupply in sparsely populated areas and a lack of it in urban centres “shows how broken our housing policy is”, says Conor Skehan, the Housing Agency’s chairman.

Fixing it will challenge the way the Irish construction industry has operated for generations. Ireland is an expensive place to build. According to the Society of Chartered Surveyors Ireland, it costs €330,000 to provide a standard family home, a figure that appears to have changed little despite the deep recession. Construction costs account for less than half of that figure with the rest made up of fees, levies, site acquisition, finance costs, tax and profit margin.

This has created an affordability problem: following restrictions on mortgage lending introduced by the central bank last year to prick a developing price bubble, even if new housing supply was freely available it is becoming increasingly expensive, especially for first-time buyers, most of whom can borrow no more than €300,000.

It is becoming clear that Ireland may need to build a different, more affordable and higher quality product than it has offered up to now. The property industry’s standard offering for generations has been a three-bedroom semi-detached house in a suburban estate. 

But Mr Skehan says the greatest demand now is for one- and two-person housing units. The days of building 500-unit semi-detached estates are over. 

“Only a fifth of the new demand that we will see for Irish homes will be for your standard three-bed semi, and builders haven’t realised that yet,” he says. “They are like Rip Van Winkle. They have woken up [post-crisis], but they haven’t realised that the world has changed.”

The industry faces two further hurdles. One is the changed relationship between banks and property developers. Irish property development has traditionally been dominated by tycoons or family enterprises using debt to finance their construction. That is no longer possible as banks nurse their crisis-era property-loan losses. Banks now demand that builders put up at least 40 per cent of the development cost in the form of equity. 

“Banks want to see balance sheets now before they will lend for property development, and most Irish developers do not have balance sheets,” says Brian Moran, senior managing director at Hines Real Estate Ireland, part of the US property company.

The other handicap, construction industry experts say, is that the sector’s operational capacity has been badly affected by the collapse. Tom Dunne, head of the school of surveying and construction management at the Dublin Institute of Technology, says the industry has become “disestablished”: its supply chain is broken and its economies of scale have vanished.

Tom Parlon, director-general of the Construction Industry Federation, does not gloss over the industry’s problems. Yet he says it is recovering and employment levels are rising, though they are currently only about half the 274,000 reached at the peak in 2007. It is recruiting skilled labour back from Canada and Australia, and looking to train the 60,000 unemployed construction workers still in Ireland.

Experts say it could take a decade to resolve Ireland’s housing shortage. Yet there are signs that well-capitalised developers are getting their shovels ready. In Adamstown, activity is due to resume this year. 

Michael Stanley, chief executive of Cairn Homes, which is developing 1,200 new properties in the town, says they should be ready next year, “and they will be affordable”, since much of the infrastructure is already in place. 

“Ireland is a great country for housebuilding,” Mr Stanley says. “We were building 25,000 new homes in the 1970s and 1980s, when the economy was a quarter of what it is now. It will take time but we can do the same again.”

Mr Bradshaw says he has no regrets about moving to Adamstown, so long as it is completed. “If they finish what they promised us,” he says, “Adamstown will be a great place to live.”

It has sometimes been said, perhaps even by the writer himself, that if Dublin is ever destroyed it could be rebuilt from the pages of Ulysses, James Joyce’s epic novel about 24 hours in the life of the city. In fact, if Dublin ever has to be rebuilt, it is more likely to look like Cherrywood.

For now, Cherrywood is a collection of green fields and dual carriageways in south Dublin, with a vista across to the Wicklow hills. In a few years, if everything goes right for Brian Moran, it will be Dublin’s newest and arguably its most modern suburb, linked to the city on the Luas tram network.

Mr Moran runs the Irish operation of Hines, a US property development company. It is the lead developer for the 400-acre Cherrywood site, where it plans to build nearly 4,000 houses and apartments and a town centre over the next five years. Planners, politicians and residents agree that developments such as this one are essential to resolving Dublin’s housing problem.

Hines is one of several international property developers who have entered the Irish market in the past few years. They have acquired prime real estate assets once owned by Irish developers who have either gone out of business or remain embedded in Nama, the bad bank created to sort out the non-performing property loans that brought down the Irish banking system. 

In the process, they are transforming the way future housing supply in Ireland will be financed and delivered — with more equity and less debt. “There is a lot of institutional money coming in, and less of the debt/developer model. What needs to be built in Ireland is way beyond the capacity of Irish banks to fund it,” says Mr Moran. 

They have other advantages over their less well-financed Irish peers, including buying materials abroad. 

