Brokers prepare for surge in Brexit trading

2016-06-17

Retail brokers are steeling themselves for a surge in trading next week as investors react to the UK vote on EU membership. 

Hargreaves Lansdown, the UK’s largest retail broker and fund supermarket, said it had been testing its IT systems and putting in place contingency plans to ensure its website could cope with the rush to buy and sell. 

It has also hired extra staff for its help desk phones, and says it will extend its help desk opening hours to make sure investors can trade without problems once the results are known next Friday. 

Hargreaves is particularly keen to make sure its trading services can weather any storm following an embarrassing IT failure in 2013 when demand for newly available Royal Mail shares caused its website to crash. 

Danny Cox, financial planner at Hargreaves, said that in the event of a Remain vote he expected to see currently unloved stocks — such as UK insurance companies, housebuilders and small retailers — to rebound. 

“We would expect some kind of bounce back [in the event of a remain vote],” he said. However, he said that a vote to leave the EU would lead to more unpredictable trading patterns. 

In the event of Brexit, “sterling will fall further and stocks will fall further”, he said, although once “a certain low” was reached, he felt investors were likely to look for value: “Those who are brave will be looking to buy at the lows.”

Barclays Stockbrokers, the UK’s second-largest retail broker, declined to comment on whether it was carrying out similar tests on its IT systems to prepare for a trading spike. 

AJ Bell, with £28bn of assets under management, said it tested the ability of its website to withstand high trading volumes “on an ongoing basis”, while broker TD Direct has set up an online tookit to reassure and help its customers. 

Investors have had to endure volatile markets in the run-up to the vote. At the start of this week, sterling and the stock market plunged after a trio of opinion polls showed the Leave campaign leading, and yields on sovereign debt also hit record lows. 

Funds invested in UK equities recorded $1.1bn (£772m) of redemptions in the week to June 15, the eighth consecutive week of outflows from the asset class according to flows tracked by EPFR Global.

However, UK stocks finished the week on a firmer note.On Friday the FTSE 100 climbed 1.2 per cent to above the 6,000 mark again and the FTSE 250, whose companies are more dependent on the performance of the UK economy, recorded a bigger advance of 2.4 per cent. 

The volatility means that many retail investors are holding off making investment decisions until the referendum on EU membership has passed. In a recent survey of its customers, Hargreaves found a quarter said they were delaying trading until after the vote. 

But Tom Becket, chief investment officer of PSigma Investment Management, said retail investors — like fund managers — should be poised to buy assets once the referendum result is known.

“All investors, retail or institutional, should be heavy in cash to buy after the vote,” he said. “Having cash to buy assets quickly means you can pick up attractive assets quickly,” he said. 

As the vote looms, emerging markets debt is in vogue with fund managers, while small UK companies have been out of favour. 

Mr Becket said PSigma portfolios were overweight in emerging markets debt “because of the collapse in Treasury yields and gilt yields”. 

However, Mr Becket said that in the event of a Remain vote “we would scale back on [gilts] relatively quickly because the yields are quite unattractive”.

Chris Mahon, asset allocation director at Baring Asset Management, said the company was also holding more emerging markets debt than usual, and avoiding small UK companies. 

“You want to steer away from the FTSE 250 because that’s where the carnage will be [in the event of Brexit],” he said. 

Mr Mahon said larger companies — those in the FTSE 100 — were likely to fare better in a Brexit scenario because many of them are denominated in dollars, rather than sterling.

“If sterling does drop as is likely after a Brexit [the FTSE 100 companies] are actually mostly immune from that,” he said.

FT Money’s coverage of the key issues

Despite brokers’ preparations, retail investors are being warned not to panic and trade too much.

Maike Currie, investment director for personal investing at Fidelity International, said retail investors who felt uncomfortable with the conditions should diversify their holdings but not shift their investments too much.

“In an environment which is likely to continue to be punctuated by market and political uncertainty, your best defence is to diversify,” she said. 

“The most important thing to do when markets get choppy is not to panic and stay invested. Making wholesale moves in and out of the market are rarely a good idea,” she added.

“The trading costs involved are too high to make such a radical move sensible. Over-trading always eats into investment returns and is best avoided.”

This article has been amended since publication to clarify that TD Direct offers an online tookit on referendum-related issues. 

