Opening Quote: Hungary for Remain

2016-06-21

Hungarians have been having a say on sterling and the UK’s EU referendum, Whitbread sales have been given a Costa coffee boost. FT Opening Quote, with commentary by City Editor Jonathan Guthrie, is your early Square Mile briefing. You can sign up for the full newsletter here.

How much weight should the views of Hungarians have in the Brexit debate? Quite a lot, when one of them is George Soros, the Budapest-born, US-based investor. He helped drive the pound out of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism in 1992 and believes sterling could drop 15- 20 per cent if Britons vote to leave the EU.One hesitates to contradict the famous investor, who has written a piece for The Guardian. But 15-20 per cent seems like a surprisingly large correction.

Sterling floats freely and markets are making an allowance for the possibility of a pro-Brexit vote, which is reflected in opinion polls split down the middle.

Countries participating in the ERM were required to keep their currencies trading within narrow relative bands through market interventions and rate-setting. This made sterling more susceptible to a steep fall back then – 15 per cent against the Deutschmark in the weeks following Black Friday, when the Treasury gave up trying to defend it.

The other notable Hungarian is prime minister Viktor Orban, who took out a full-page advert in the Daily Mail. He urged readers to vote Remain. Purchasers of that highly insular tabloid can confidently be expected to do exactly the opposite to what any foreigner with a funny-sounding name tells them to.

There is a cluster of trading statements this morning. Whitbread, under no-nonsense boss Alison Brittain, produced sales growth of 8 per cent in the first quarter. The Premier Inn hotel subsidiary struck the same number, while café chain Costa lifted revenues 11.5 per cent. Shares have languished since Ms Brittain took over from Andy Harrison, due to doubts on growth prospects.

Oil services group Petrofac has reaffirmed profits guidance for 2016 and says net debt will rise to $1.1bn reflecting capital expenditure and dividend payments. Oldie-bothering travel and insurance group Saga also says it is on track in the current financial year.

Just Eat, the fast-growing fast food group, has appointed Paul Harrison to replace Mike Wroe as chief financial officer in September. He joins from tech group WANdisco. He may be secretly relieved to escape jargon about Hadoop programming and a weak share price.

Struggling defence group Chemring has announced a £16.8m lossbefore tax in the first half, a £1.7m increase. The company says full year underlying operating profits will now be below a consensus forecast of £48.7m.

More cheerfully, Petra Diamonds has recovered a 121-carat diamond from the famous Cullinan mine in South Africa.

In or out of the EU, you can bet the trains still won’t run on time. Readers have our sympathies if they are struggling to work this morning in the face of a strike on the execrable Southern rail service, operated by Go-Ahead subsidiary Govia.

