How Brexit spelled the end to Cameron’s career

2016-06-24

David Cameron did not want to hold an EU referendum and for years he resisted the idea. Then on the morning of January 23, 2013 his party forced him to deliver a speech that foreshadowed his own political destruction.

It was the beginning of a road that led to his announcement on Friday of his resignation as prime minister, with the plan to have a successor installed by the time of the October Conservative party conference.

Mr Cameron’s sense of foreboding about the political forces he was unleashing ran through the speech he gave on that winter day in 2013, at Bloomberg’s London headquarters, as he finally gave Conservative MPs the vote on Europe they had long craved.

“It’s true that our geography has shaped our psychology,” he said. “We have the character of an island nation — independent, forthright, passionate in defence of our sovereignty. We can no more change this British sensibility than we can drain the English Channel.”

Those words turned out to be prophetic. In the end British exceptionalism triumphed over Mr Cameron’s warnings about the risks of Brexit, as the country decided to end its 43-year EU membership . As a result, the prime minister decided he had to go. 

Years before, George Osborne, chancellor of the exchequer, had urged him not to hold the referendum, arguing that it was unlikely to cure the Conservative party’s decades-old Euro-neuralgia. He feared — correctly — it would inflame it.

“Osborne was by far the most reluctant to commit to a referendum,” said one diplomat. “He thought it was a gamble. If you could avoid taking it, why take it? He was the main player in ensuring we did not overbid.”

But Mr Cameron, backed by William Hague, the former foreign secretary, concluded that the only way to hold the party together through the 2015 general election campaign was to promise an EU referendum.

The setting for that fateful decision: a pizza restaurant at Chicago O’Hare airport, where Mr Cameron met with Mr Hague and Ed Llewellyn, his trusted chief of staff and an old-hand in Brussels. 

It was a “kick the can down the road” party management exercise that has been used repeatedly by Mr Cameron, a pragmatic prime minister who had sought to delay the ultimate confrontation with his party over Europe.

What was your initial feeling after you heard the results? What questions do you have now? Share your thoughts with the FT community here.

Britain’s voters have always been less interested in the EU than Mr Cameron’s Conservative MPs and activists, many of whom are ardent sovereigntists for whom Brussels “rule” is an affront.

At the 2015 general election Europe seldom featured in the top 10 of issues listed by voters among their principal concerns; Mr Cameron’s problem was that for some of his MPs it was the main reason they went into politics.

“It was like Balrog waiting to be awakened,” joked David Lidington, Europe minister, in a Tolkien-inspired reference to his party’s tendency to erupt into a Euro-frenzy at any moment.

Mr Cameron accommodated his party’s obsession for years. To get elected as Tory leader in 2005 he pulled the Conservatives out of the European People’s Party — the centre-right grouping in the European Parliament — even though that diminished British influence.

Running into the 2010 election he offered the party a “referendum lock” — legislation to ensure that any further transfer of power from Westminster to Brussels would have to be put to the British people.

That was a sop to critics as Mr Cameron’s backed out of his “cast-iron” commitment to hold a referendum on the Lisbon treaty. At that time, in 2009, he raised the idea of a referendum on negotiated “guarantees to protect our democratic decision making”. But it would be for the medium term — no sooner than five years. It was a cheap promise to give.

Mr Cameron was sure such a transfer of power would not happen and soon more than 80 Tory MPs were agitating for Mr Cameron to offer a straight in-out referendum. Governing was becoming impossible.

“If you want to go feeding crocodiles then you’d better not run out of buns,” was how Ken Clarke, the former chancellor, described Mr Cameron’s strategy. By the time of the Bloomberg speech, the buns had indeed run out.

Mr Cameron’s self-confidence led him to believe he could sell a “reformed EU” to the British people, following the conclusion of a renegotiation of Britain’s membership terms in February 2016.

Indeed during a dinner in 2014 with Herman Van Rompuy, the wily Belgian former president of the European Council, Mr Cameron oozed confidence about his strategy. 

Speaking during the early stages of the Scottish independence referendum campaign, he said: “I will win this easily and it will put to bed the Scottish referendum question for 20 years. The same goes for Europe.” 

Instead the referendum opened up an acrimonious split in the Conservative party which spilled into a campaign dominated by immigration. “We are inflicting all the past animosity of the Conservative party on the country,” admitted one Tory MP.

Europe has now laid waste to Mr Cameron’s premiership, just as the EU played a key role in the downfall of his two Tory predecessors: John Major and Margaret Thatcher. It would be a reckless pundit who predicted that Europe will not continue to define and disfigure Tory politics.

Mr Cameron, the prime minister who pulled Britain back from the brink of an economic precipice in 2010, will instead be remembered as the prime minister who gambled Britain’s place in Europe to try to pacify his party and lost.

