Who could lead the UK post-Brexit? Sturgeon

2016-06-22

Sir, Should the Brexit vote succeed it does not commit the British government to leaving the EU. David Cameron promised he would be guided by the outcome but it is unlikely that he would remain prime minister after a leave vote. The anti-Europe faction in the Conservative party would insist that he step down but it is by no means evident that they have support to elect one of their own, especially someone like Boris Johnson. A deadlocked Tory party could lead to an election but would not resolve the question of who would lead that party in an election. Is there any alternative?

The strategic way out of this deadlock is a short-term national government held together by the desire of coalition members to remain in the EU. It might be composed of pro-Europe Tories, most of Labour, the Lib Dems, Greens, and Scottish Nationalists. The coalition strategy would be to negotiate some further fig leaves from the EU and hold a second referendum. A No vote in the first referendum would, in all likelihood, have rapid and negative across-the-board economic consequences; only the expected drop in house prices will be welcomed by any significant segment of the population. 

Within six months to a year, British public opinion may well view membership of the EU in a new light.

Who could lead such a national government? Certainly not Mr Cameron or Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn. The former is anathema to anti-Europe Tories and to members of every other party. The latter does not have the support of a majority of Labour MPs. The obvious candidate is Nicola Sturgeon. She is clearly the best and most widely respected politician in the country. She is unequivocally pro-EU, and from a region that will presumably have returned the highest pro-Europe vote. She is a Scottish Nationalist committed to independence so cannot have any pretension of leadership at Westminster in a subsequent election. She has considerable credibility in Europe, making it more likely that she will succeed in gaining the necessary concessions to justify a second referendum and bring about a positive vote. Some may think it contradictory that a Scottish Nationalist would become British prime minister but she has a ready reply, especially to Scots. It is much better for an independent Scotland within the EU to have as its neighbour a Britain also within the EU.

A vote to remain would make this scenario academic, but it is essential to think about how to respond to a Brexit victory.

Richard Ned Lebow

Professor of International Political Theory,

Department of War Studies,

King’s College London, UK

