European bank stocks plunge 18%; worst day on record

2016-06-24

The Euro Stoxx Banks Index has plunged 18.7 per cent in the wake of the UK’s vote to leave the EU, its worst one-day drop ever.

The losses are substantially steeper than anything seen before- the index has only dropped more 10 per cent on one occasion- in 2008 when it dropped 10.3 per cent, write Joel Lewin and Thomas Hale.

The index has skidded to its lowest level since summer 2012, taking its losses for the year past 36 per cent.

“Financials are set to be the biggest victims of a Brexit,” warn Bank of America Merrill Lynch strategists.

BAML has cut financials to underweight in the aftermass of the referendum, pointing to “a combination of factors including market volatility, a hit to the growth outlook, further monetary easing and a prolonged outlook for low / negative interest rates, and potential political contagion to periphery assets.”

BAML economists expect a recession in the UK and a “significant hit” to euro area GDP over the next 12 months.

Bank stocks plunged at the open, racking up huge losses, in both the UK and the eurozone, although these losses were steeper for the former.

Lloyds dived 30 per cent while RBS slid 34 per cent. They are now down 21 per cent and 17.3 per cent respectively, while Barclays is off 20.5 per cent.

Their eurozone counterparts are now nursing similarly steep losses, with SocGen down 20.8 per cent, BNP Paribas off 18 per cent and Deutsche Bank down 15 per cent.

BAML adds: “Potential concerns over renewed calls for Scoxit could add uncertainty to Scottish-headquartered banks and insurers.”

An abrupt reversal in interest rate expectations poses a further concern for bank stocks, particularly in the UK. Before the vote, futures markets were pricing a 21.7 per cent probability of a Bank of England rate rise and a 17.5 per cent probability of a rate cut by February 2017. Today that has swung to a 0 per cent probability of a rate rise and a 69.4 per cent probability of a cut.

This raises the prospect of rock bottom interest rates for much longer in the UK, a further challenge to bank interest margins and earnings. BAML suggests “further earnings downgrades are likely”.

