Refugees numbers top 60m, going to war on guns and North Korea’s safe haven for birds

2016-06-20

Sign up to receive FirstFT by email here

The number of people displaced by conflict is at the highest level ever recorded, the UN refugee agency says. It estimates that 65.3m people were either refugees, asylum seekers or internally displaced at the end of 2015, an increase of 5m in a year, representing one in every 113 people. 

Over half of the total comes from just three countries: Syria, Afghanistan and Somalia. Meanwhile, the UN refugee chief says a worrying “climate of xenophobia” has taken hold in Europe as it struggles to cope with the migrant crisis

Apple drops backing for Republican convention The tech giant has told Republican leaders it will not provide support for the party’s 2016 presidential convention, as it’s done in the past, citing Donald Trump’s controversial comments about women, immigrants and minorities. Unlike Facebook, Google and Microsoft, which have all said they will provide some support to the GOP event, Apple decided against donating technology or cash to the effort, according to two sources familiar with the iPhone maker’s plans. (Politico)

Anthem-Cigna deal raises competition concerns US antitrust regulators have privately expressed concerns about Anthem’s $48bn proposed acquisition of Cigna, amid doubts that the health insurers can offer concessions that would fully preserve competition in the industry, according to people familiar with the matter. Company representatives met Justice Department staffers and representatives of more than a dozen state attorneys-general on June 10, when government officials outlined their worries about combining two of the nation’s top health insurers, the people said. (WSJ)

Pound surges as Brexit polls level out The pound carved out one of its biggest rallies of the past decade after the latest opinion polls on Britain’s EU referendum showed rising support for the Remain campaign that put it neck-and-neck with the rival Leave camp. David Cameron invoked the memory of Labour MP Jo Cox, who was shot and killed last week, to press the case for Britain staying in the EU, as the referendum campaign entered its final week. (FT) Click here to see our special Brexit hub page on the new FT website.

Rome elects first female mayor Virginia Raggi, a 37-year-old lawyer, has become the first female mayor of Rome, after an election that delivered a resounding victory to the populist Five Star Movement and a blow to centre-left prime minister Matteo Renzi. Adding to the Five Star Movement’s momentum since its controversial founder Beppe Grillo stepped down earlier this year, another woman, Chiara Appendino, was voted mayor of Turin, ousting the centre-left incumbent. (FT)

Brazil's 20-year budget freeze The ambitious plan to eliminate real increases in budget spending for up to two decades is a central plank of reforms that the government of interim president Michel Temer is rushing through congress. (FT)

China in talks to renegotiate Venezuela loans Beijing is renegotiating billions of dollars of loans to Venezuela and has met the country’s political opposition, marking a shift in its approach to a nation it once viewed as a US counterweight in the Americas and which has seen more than 50 food riots in the past two weeks. (FT, NYT)

Chinese ‘democracy village’ chief arrested Riot police locked down the village of Wukan — which captured attention worldwide when residents overthrew local Communist officials — and detained village chief Lin Zulian after he called for renewed protests against corruption and land grabs in a town viewed as an incubator for grass roots democracy. (FT)

A blood supply without needles A Japanese start-up is working to create large amounts of blood in vitro as it seeks to compensate for a shrinking pool of donors in the country. (NAR)

Facebook Investors in the social networking site will vote on a proposed new class of shares that will allow founder Mark Zuckerberg to give away his wealth without giving up long-term control of the company at the annual shareholder meeting. (FT)

US gun control The Senate plans to take four procedural votes on amendments that would make it harder for suspected terrorists to purchase guns. None is expected to get the 60 votes required for further action. Democrats were expected to block two Republican amendments, arguing that they fall short in controlling the sales of guns. Republicans were expected to block two Democratic amendments, contending that they threaten the constitutional rights of gun owners. (ABC)

Going to war against guns The NRA’s answer to mass shootings is that everyone must arm themselves, says Ed Luce. “It is a recipe made in hell. The sane majority must respond in greater force. Communities should picket every gun store and besiege every lawmaker’s office until the law changes. This is America. Change can still come from the grass roots — just ask the gay community. But people must want it badly enough for it to happen.” (FT)

Rajan resignation rattles investors The departure of respected Reserve Bank of India governor Raghuram Rajan is unnerving investors, who had lauded the former International Monetary Fund chief economist for his handling of the country's economy and bad debt problem. “Mr Rajan’s major virtue, and an unforgivable fault in the eyes of government acolytes, was that he did not sign up to the triumphalist view of India as the fastest-growing major economy,” writes Eswar Prasad. His “untimely departure will leave scars that could end up scarring the Indian economy”. (FT)

Time to call time on Mad Men era? More than 100 years after it dawned on James Walter Thompson that his marketing messages might be more effective if he targeted the people responsible for most household purchases — women — the agency he founded has its first female chief executive. Tamara Ingram’s appointment was prompted by the resignation of Gustavo Martinez after JWT’s head of communications, filed a lawsuit accusing him of an “unending stream of racist and sexist comments”. Mr Martinez denies the allegations and has filed a motion to dismiss the suit. But whatever the outcome, the case highlights the gender bias that still pervades advertising 50 years on from the excesses of the Mad Men era, recreated in the television series. (FT)

Trump’s ‘charitable’ boasts about donations The former reality TV star has spent years making grandiose claims about his charitable giving — but a review of his foundation's records reveals little walk to back up all that talk: between 1988 and 2014, the man who claims to be worth billions donated just over $5m. (BuzzFeed) Keep track of the race with the FT's daily US politics newsletter. Sign up here.

North Korea’s safe haven for birds Despite being closed to most foreigner visitors, North Korea may ironically be the saviour of one of the world’s greatest international migration routes — the avian East Asian Australasian Flyway. Recent photos reveal how the ecology of the secretive Asian country is preventing the extinction of several once plentiful species of migratory birds. (BBC)

Pillory at the centre of the global village The advent of social media has raised the volume on shaming as millions of judgmental types get in on the act via Facebook, Twitter and their online brethren. All too often, the line between understandable finger-wagging and unbridled bullying has been blurred or even erased by cybermobs, says Clyde Haberman. (NYT)

My Brexit Road Trip With the EU referendum only days away, the FT’s resident New Yorker, Rob Armstrong, goes on a road trip in south-east England — replete with cricket, boarding schools and cows — in search of the British temperament. (FT)

