Jockeying begins to succeed Cameron

2016-06-24

Boris Johnson moved to centre stage in Westminster as the odds-on favourite to become Britain’s next prime minister, with his decision to back Brexit looking like a masterstroke — at least from the point of view of his own career.

When David Cameron, his voice cracking with emotion, announced that he was quitting after six years as prime minister, his resignation was arguably only the third biggest story running on Friday morning.

His resignation statement in Downing Street was an interlude in bulletins dominated by the momentous Brexit vote and the market chaos that ensued.

“This is not a decision I have taken lightly,” he said. But his aides said that behind the door of Number 10 there was a grim acceptance that the prime minister had to quit after this humiliation.

Even as he made his farewell to the country, the jockeying had already begun for the succession as prime minister. Mr Cameron headed to Buckingham Palace, his despairing Tory team went to the pub.

The prime minister will stay on until October to “steady the ship” but his time in Number 10, remarkably, is now in the past tense. Just a year ago he secured the first Tory majority at an election since 1992.

Mr Johnson, the charismatic former mayor of London, is suspected by some MPs of being a secret “Inner”, who attached himself to the Brexit campaign to woo the 150,000 or so Tory activists who have the final say in who will be Britain’s next prime minister.

A politician more used to posing for selfies with fans, he is now playing for big stakes. He was bundled out of his house and into a waiting car by police as protesters shouted “scum” and banged on the vehicle’s roof. 

Mr Johnson appeared subdued when he arrived at Vote Leave headquarters to make his first public statement after the Brexit vote; billed as a “press conference”, he took no questions.

Alongside Michael Gove, once one of Mr Cameron’s best friends, Mr Johnson lavished praise on the “brave and principled” departing prime minister and sought to explain how Brexit would work in practice.

Like Mr Gove, Mr Johnson was keen to stress that nothing much would change in the short term and that there was “no need for haste” in redrawing Britain’s relations with Europe.

After backing a campaign that highlighted the alleged threat of Turkey joining the EU and flooding Britain with migrants, Mr Johnson was anxious to reassure “young people” that Brexit was not about intolerance or isolationism.

Mr Johnson’s outward-looking cosmopolitanism may not be exactly what many Leave voters had in mind. A poll by Lord Ashcroft showed that Brexit voters were much more likely than Remainers to think that immigration, multiculturalism and social liberalism were “a force for ill”.

The former mayor is the man to beat in the race to succeed Mr Cameron, which will now unfold in two stages. Tory MPs whittle down the candidates to a shortlist of two, which is then put to a postal ballot of party members. The coronation will be at the party conference in October.

Although he lacks a strong base among Tory MPs at Westminster, his record as a winner capable of reaching beyond traditional blue heartlands is likely to ensure he gets on to the shortlist.

But Mr Johnson will face a fight. Mr Cameron and George Osborne, in spite of their diminishing powers, will do all they can to stop him taking the crown.

Mr Osborne, who will stay on as chancellor until October, acknowledges that his chances of succeeding Mr Cameron vanished in the early hours of Friday morning as the country voted for Brexit.

But the chancellor has a powerful network of allies that could be deployed to support an “ABB” candidate: anyone but Boris. Mr Osborne’s allies say he still eyes a move to the Foreign Office, a possible reward for his support. Pro-Remain Tory MPs, many of them loyal to Mr Cameron and Mr Osborne, were busy exchanging gossip on a WhatsApp group on Friday, discussing which candidate was best placed to stop the former mayor.

Stephen Crabb, the fast-rising work and pensions secretary, is popular and comes from a working class Welsh background: he is inexperienced but seen as a potential bridge to the country’s disenfranchised voters.

Theresa May, home secretary, has long been seen as the most likely second candidate to face Mr Johnson on a shortlist; she lacks allies at Westminster and has scratchy relations with the chancellor, but that could be remedied.

“They have a transactional relationship,” said one ally of Mr Osborne. “Boris and Gove are now seen on our side as ‘Cameron killers’, so we are looking at different options.”

Amber Rudd, the combative pro-Remain energy secretary, is considering a run for the leadership, but there could be many others. Michael Fallon, defence secretary, predicted a “slate” of candidates. 

Whoever succeeds Mr Cameron in October will have to decide whether to hold an early general election to seek a personal mandate, avoiding the perceived mistake by Gordon Brown in not having a snap election when he succeeded Tony Blair as Labour prime minister in 2007.

Andrew Bridgen, one Tory backbencher, suggested an election could be held next May, but Michael Ellis, another MP said: “The British public have only just elected us. We have a mandate for five years.”

An early election might make sense if Labour were still locked in an internal debate over Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership. It would, however, require Labour MPs to vote for a dissolution of parliament, since there is now a fixed five-year term between elections.

There could be one major drawback though. An election this autumn or in 2017 would take place while Britain was still negotiating its exit from the EU.

If the economy was suffering as a result of the Brexit vote, would Labour or the Liberal Democrats campaign on a manifesto offering a second referendum allowing voters the chance to change their mind. The European issue that devoured Mr Cameron is unlikely to go away.

Additional reporting by Kiran Stacey

