50 ways to hedge your Brexit: ‘Sterling hit won’t last’

2016-06-16

fastFT has asked investors and analysts what their plans are for June 24, the day after the UK’s EU referendum, particularly in the event that the UK votes to leave. Our first selection is here. Now for some more…

Shahab Jalinoos, a currencies analyst at Credit Suisse says the options market is already pricing in a blast of weakness in smaller European currencies such as the Swedish krona.

There is a similar profile across all liquid European currencies, meaning in effect there is no “cheap” way to cover Brexit risk in FX via European FX options.

This means we now need to consider whether it makes more sense to leave the European FX spectrum altogether and consider whether there is better risk/reward in considering whether some currency pairs offer protection against a more general liquidity problem in FX markets.

For example, the Canadian dollar (against the US dollar) tends to be a “high beta” currency pair that correlates with global risk appetite. It may be worth looking in this kind of space now for “cheap” hedges as opposed to expensive direct cover.

Aurelija Augultye, a currencies analyst at Nordea, like buying sterling (though obviously timing matters). Bear with us here:

While the immediate impact on the Brexit news would be sterling negative, it will not be large and won’t last longer than a day or two as we will get policy response. Ultimately the worst case scenario (Brexit) will likely have more negative impact for Fed pricing than the BoE, helping the pound.

On the contrary, “no Brexit” means we go back to business as usual, and the Bank of England will very likely hike rates earlier than 40 months from now, as the market prices in currently.

Luis Costa, an EM currencies analyst at Citi, says:

We will trade a lot more nervous in 1) sterling and euro; 2) peripheral spreads; 3) CE back-end. EM hard currency has become a low beta play now (we don’t want to use the expression ‘safe haven’, because it is not such a thing), which has supported a very timid reaction function on the EM $ bond side.

In my view, the markets will continue to flirt with a proper risk-off move, as these polls show a tilt towards the Leave camp. We have 2 short-term trades to capture that: 1) long yen against the Polish zloty; 2) long Israeli shekels against sterling. Once (and if) the dust settles after the vote next week, there will be many opportunities to explore in core markets and EM. But the markets will have to get through this huge hurdle now.

Global risk will remain jumpy ahead of next week’s referendum, and fast money accounts have no incentive whatsoever to build up sizeable exposure now. The outcome looks very binary to risk P&L now. The interesting spin in this story this week is the Fed’s reaction function. As core assets take further legs lower, Yellen may choose to offer some ‘dovish support’.

Richard McGuire, a rates analyst at Rabobank, says:

A long Spain vs. Germany position entered just prior to Jun 23 is an obvious way of playing the view that the remain camp will take the day. This, though, is very much a binary trade as a “leave” victory will blow this position out of the water.

A safer trade would be to go long Italy vs. Spain. The high correlation of these two markets offers protection in the event of a leave vote. Either way, meanwhile, as the UK referendum is put behind us, the market’s attention will quickly shift to the Spanish election on Jun 26 (and with this vote very possibly proving inconclusive once again) which stands to see Spain underperform in a sell-off and lag a broader peripheral rally.

Want to contribute? Email katie.martin@ft.com

