Brexit: Britain out, bear in

2016-06-24

It has been, by common consent, the most unloved bull market in history. This does not imply that the ensuing bear will be greeted with affection. Now that the UK has voted to leave the EU, that bear market feels a lot closer. 

The seven-year rally in global risk assets, led by US stocks, has been so joyless for two main reasons. First, the monetary policy that has accompanied the rising prices has no precedent, so its long-term effects are uncertain. Second, the rally has been given only equivocal support by corporations’ financial fundamentals. Revenue growth is painfully scarce; bottom lines have been supported by cost-cutting and share repurchases. 

If the market was overinflated, air has started hissing out. On Friday morning, there was indiscriminate pressure across global markets. By the afternoon, specific sectors had been singled out for vicious pummeling (UK banks, homebuilders, and retailers) while the broader indices recovered. What next week brings is anyone’s guess. Though the direct financial impact of Brexit is not well understood, markets are, rightly, pricing harms that are perfectly foreseeable. A stronger dollar will hurt commodities and emerging market economies. Political uncertainty will delay investment decisions concerning Europe and the UK. There will be a serious discussion of a second Scottish referendum. And this huge victory for populism will force the US to consider the possibility that the frightening ignoramus hoping to lead their nation actually has a shot at getting the job.

Still, for those who have participated only tentatively in the rally, and as such have cash on hand, there is a reason to put that cash to work — slowly, but starting now. One must remember the old point: no one rings a bell when the market hits a low. Those who desire the high returns that have been captured in the past by those who “bought on the sound of cannons” cannot be cute about timing. Further, the schedule for central bank rate increases has surely been pushed further out. While the impact on the UK and European economies will be negative, there is the possibility that the hit to confidence is not as bad as feared and the status quo, in terms of global trade, is sustained for quite a long time. In any case, the UK is less than 4 per cent of the world economy. 

Finally, and perhaps most importantly, big, long-term investors such as pension funds and insurance companies are absolutely starved for yield. If a correction makes yield available, they will step in to grab it. 

None of this is a suggestion to run out and buy, say British banks. But capitalism is resilient, and those who hated the rally should fight their feelings and learn to love the bear. 

Email the Lex team at lex@ft.com

