Leave vote spooks UK-based business leaders

2016-06-24

Business leaders who were worried about a British exit from the EU, but did nothing to help the Remain campaign, should now be regretting their failure of nerve. But recriminations over the past will be the last thing on any company bosses’ minds this morning. Falling markets and a plunging pound are the initial warning signs of a period of uncertainty with which UK companies and foreign investors alike will find it hard to cope.

The two most immediate challenges are practical. Some businesses have taken an oversanguine approach and failed to plan for this eventuality. Many more, though, have prepared contingency plans, and will now be putting them into place. Pace the market impact, nothing will change overnight. Trading conditions and contractual relationships will be affected in future but in the short term attempting to shore up confidence will be the first item on companies’ to-do list. For some this will mean reassuring employees that no imminent change to either their job or where they do it is on the cards. For others, it will mean renewed emphasis on the UK’s robust trading relationships outside the EU.

Such reassurance, unfortunately, will ring pretty hollow. Lloyd Blankfein, Goldman Sachs’ boss, issued the blandest of statements on Friday morning (the bank, he said, “had a long history of adapting to change”). But London-based bankers will offset this with the oft-repeated warnings from the likes of Jamie Dimon at JPMorgan, or HSBC, that, with Brexit, specific operations, and with them jobs, would shift from London to the continent.

The next priority will be to start lobbying government on what business believes it should put highest up on the list of negotiating demands. These are pretty obvious. First, losing access to the single market would be a big blow to any company exporting to the EU from the UK. Second, no longer being able to move staff freely around the EU or bring them from the bloc into the UK will affect businesses of all sizes. British employers do not just rely on Italian and French bankers but also the migrant workers currently in rural Kent to pick strawberries.

Arguing for continued free movement of labour will be imperative but may be a battle that is impossible to win, given how important cutting immigration was to the Leave campaign’s appeal. Such difficulties reflect the failure of business leaders, as well as politicians, to make the bold and brave positive case for immigration before the referendum. 

Some business groups have said they are pleased that David Cameron has now said that Article 50, and thus formal exit negotiations, will not be triggered until the autumn, since it will give the UK and its trading partners important time for reflection after the heat of the battle has cooled. 

But the challenge is whether, with the Conservative party now embroiled in what is sure to be a bitter leadership campaign, anyone in government will be listening to their concerns in the months ahead. As one FTSE 100 boss asked plaintively this morning: “Who will I talk to?” 

sarah.gordon@ft.com

