City struggles through nightmarish day and fears for future

2016-06-24

City workers headed into their offices yesterday fearful that their employers would soon start cutting back in London as concerns over the turmoil in financial markets rapidly morphed into a broader anxiety for their future.

“Every bank is drawing up a shortlist of cities where they might relocate part of their operations, which includes Frankfurt, Paris, Amsterdam and Dublin,” said the head of government affairs at one large bank. “No city offers everything that London offers. I imagine there’ll be a real bidding war from various European governments and regulators.”

In the run-up to the referendum, US banks including Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs, Citigroup, Bank of America Merrill Lynch and JPMorgan warned that if Brexit became a reality, they could move staff to the EU. 

Banks were reluctant to speak publicly about their next steps and rushed to reassure EU staff working in the UK that there would be no immediate effect on their terms of employment. But senior executives admitted privately they are looking at “Plan B” and have begun putting contingency plans into action to move people to other European jurisdictions. 

“Overseas banks currently using the UK as a base for accessing the EU market and employing an estimated 115,000 staff are likely to be looking closely at their operations in the UK in the context of the Leave vote,” said Simon Hunt, UK head of banking and capital markets at professional services firm PwC.

Sir George Iacobescu, chairman and chief executive of Canary Wharf Group, home to many international banks, said the next few months would be critical. “There will be a period of reassessment for the property market. It will have to follow what demand is on both the office and residential side.”

While they wait for their fates to be decided, traders and bankers struggled in a thin market after opening.

Banks across Europe and the US were caught up in the negative reaction to Britain’s EU referendum result, with European banks’ shares tumbling and American lenders facing uncertainties over the future of their large UK operations.Read on

“It felt a bit like 9/11 in terms of looking into the abyss,” said a managing director in prime brokerage, a business that services hedge funds.

“This morning between 7 and 9 there was no liquidity,” said a commodities broker who declined to be named. He was calming his nerves with a small beer and a cigarette at a cafe in Broadgate Circle at 11.30am. “It was more difficult than usual to get prices, extremely hard. We saw general panic to start and now reality is returning to markets.” 

Some City workers had slept through the swing in the vote on Thursday night and woke up to a shock. Others decided to trade through the night. “I did not sleep at all last night, I was watching it unfold on television and trading S&P futures,” said one prominent Mayfair hedge fund manager. 

“It is bad. There is a lot of money being lost today in the City, Lehman Brothers-style. Levels of adrenalin are very high everywhere.”

The head of one investment bank described how he had been feeling “quite relaxed” on his sofa at 11pm on Thursday. “I got picked up at midnight, by the time I got to the office around 1.15am it was obvious that something was very wrong.” 

As the day progressed, a sombre mood swept the financial districts of the Square Mile, Canary Wharf and Mayfair, and people tried to digest what the result will mean for their jobs and the wider industry.

London’s financial services community, which drives an overall UK trade surplus in financial services of £20bn, is overwhelmingly pro-European. A poll of lobby group TheCityUK’s members found that 84 per cent of members were in favour of remaining in the EU, while just 5 per cent backed a British exit.

————————-

FT Post-Referendum BriefingWhat next?

FT journalists will be discussing what’s next for Britain and the EU, on Monday June 27, in London. Find more details here.

————————-

One of the key benefits of EU membership to the banking sector is the ability to access a single market of goods, services and 500m customers. Banks face three big questions: to what extent will the UK be able to retain access to the single market in the terms of a Brexit? Can banks buy or build a separate subsidiary to give them access to it? And what parts of their business will they need to shift onshore to Europe?

Sitting on steps next to the lawn in Broadgate Circle near Liverpool Street, seven young economists, each non-British and each from a different country, discussed their reactions to the vote. “I woke up crying,” said Anna, 28, from Sweden. “I am super depressed about the wider ramifications for British politics and the economy.” 

“We were in a bubble in London thinking this would never happen,” said 27-year-old Andrea, from Germany.

Brexit did find support among London’s brokers, many of which are private companies irked by European regulation they feel was drawn up with the bulge-bracket banks in mind and disproportionately hits their businesses.

“I think this an extremely good thing,” said Oliver Hemsley, chief executive of UK broker Numis Securities. “We are absolutely enveloped in European regulation, which is of no benefit to my organisation, largely as a result of the bad behaviour of the big banks in the past.”

Howard Shore, executive chairman of rival broker Shore Capital Group, agreed: “We now have a fantastic opportunity to deregulate the economy and better compete on a global stage in the 21st century.” 

But this optimism was rare. As the City’s employees headed home wired with coffee, shock and exhaustion, they all agreed on one thing: “This is just the beginning,” said the hedge fund manager.

Additional reporting by Laura Noonan

