Brexit countdown: 5 days to go

2016-06-17

A change of toneOn Friday British politics exhibited a decorum that has been sadly absent this year. Like all truces, the suspension of the EU referendum campaigns had its grey areas. Vote Leave put out a press release responding to the IMF’s warning on Brexit; both sides are likely to do leafleting at a local level on Saturday. 

The debate will really restart — in a much-changed form — on Sunday morning, when Jeremy Corbyn and Michael Gove appear on the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show. On Monday MPs will pay tribute to Jo Cox in parliament. Then on Tuesday night three figures from either side of the referendum are due to take part in a debate at Wembley Arena, in front of an audience of 6,000.

The Remain campaign had initially objected to the Wembley event on the grounds that it could become a “bear pit”. Now it is very difficult even to imagine any personal insults (“I fear the only number that Boris is interested in is the one that says Number 10,” said Remain’s Amber Rudd in a spiky ITV debate this month). Who knows if such tactics were ever effective; everyone knows they are no longer appropriate.

By-electionsThe by-election in Jo Cox’s constituency of Batley and Spen will not be contested by parties other than Labour. Cox increased Labour’s majority in the seat when she was elected in last year’s general election — proving again, she joked, “that in my neck of the woods non-conformity is what we do best”.

Self-restraint requiredNigel Farage’s controversial anti-migration advert, which was launched hours before Jo Cox’s murder, has been reported to the police. The ad features a photo of a large number of Syrian refugees arriving at the Slovenian border last year, with the headline “Breaking Point”. It is in very questionable taste (Nicola Sturgeon called it “disgusting”), but even so the police are unlikely to decide that it amounts to inciting racial hatred.

Political speech is legally well protected in the UK. Public outrage is therefore often the only tool available — hence Leave.EU, Mr Farage’s campaign group, took down a message linking the EU to the Orlando nightclub massacre. And yet by the time the message was taken down, it had already served its purpose of focusing minds on the threat of immigration. 

Quote of the day“For everyone around politics — press, politicians, perhaps members of the public too — yesterday was just this moment when you thought: ‘Gosh, a lot of the way we conduct ourselves looks so small in comparison to this terrible event’.”Ed Miliband, former Labour leaderHenry Mance will be writing his daily briefing until the EU vote ft.com/countdown

