What will Brexit mean for the City of London?

2016-06-24

What is Brexit’s impact for London’s financial centre?

Britain’s decision to leave the EU is a historic one — and one of the sectors that will be profoundly affected is the City of London. There was no secret of the financial sector’s preferences ahead of Thursday’s referendum. 

City UK, a lobby group that spans most of the City of London’s big employers in banking, insurance and asset management, found in a poll that 84 per cent of members were in favour of remaining in the EU, while only 5 per cent backed a British exit. 

Some smaller groups will be excited by the prospect of being unshackled from onerous EU regulations, and bankers will welcome the likely end of the EU cap on bonuses. But, for many big city institutions, the mechanics of how they operate may be about to change profoundly.

Over the past 30 years the City has become much more international, with US and other global banks now dominant. Crucial to their presence in London is the EU principle of “passporting”, which allows them to access the European single market without restrictions. Several banks have warned that Brexit will undermine the logic of basing so many staff in the UK. JPMorgan said it could axe up to 4,000 UK jobs, while HSBC has suggested up to 1,000 posts could move to Paris, where it has a sizeable subsidiary. Many other employers said in private in the run-up to the vote that they would move jobs to continental Europe. 

What is most at risk?

If there is one activity that the City of London dominates it is foreign exchange trading. Bankers are split over exactly how endangered London’s crown is now that the country has opted for Brexit — the City had been dominant for decades before the creation of the EU. But its continued claim as the world’s principal location for trading the euro — a $2tn a day market — looks vulnerable. 

The European Central Bank has already attempted to bar clearing houses outside the eurozone from handling the euro. Last year, it failed, thanks to a ruling at the EU’s highest court. But many in the City and in policymaking circles believe the UK only prevailed thanks to its membership of the EU. Outside the gang, they believe the country faces rapidly losing its euro business. Other connected trading activity could follow.

Which European financial centre would win at London’s expense?

Paris recently made a bold pitch to woo City of London bankers in the event of Brexit. But, HSBC aside, most banks scoff at the idea that Paris would be a natural venue. Frankfurt, home of the European Central Bank and the financial capital of Europe’s biggest economy, is also problematic. 

What was your initial feeling after you heard the results? What questions do you have now? Share your thoughts with the FT community here.

The local economy minister said this week that several foreign banks had explored moving operations to Frankfurt in recent months.

But, as a small city with a population of less than 700,000 people, Frankfurt is seen as provincial and unpopular with staff. Dublin is English-speaking and attractive on tax grounds, but it is a relative backwater. The most likely outcome is that foreign banks with large operations in London will shift staff to a spread of eurozone locations where they already have operations — including Frankfurt, Dublin, Paris, Warsaw and Lisbon. That would fragment the financial services industry in Europe, potentially weakening the continent’s ability to compete internationally. 

In insurance, another sector whose European activity is highly concentrated in London, there have been predictions that Asian financial centres, such as Singapore and Tokyo, may now steal business from the likes of Lloyd’s of London, the insurance market, if the UK capital no longer claims special access to Europe.

Would the City be more British now that the country has decided on Brexit?

In addition to the prospect that jobs will shift to other financial centres, the City may also now lose some of its most able employees as the UK heads out of the EU.

Free movement of people rules have allowed the City to expand by tapping the best staff from across the EU. Nearly 11 per cent of the City’s 360,000 workers come from elsewhere in the EU, according to the latest census. That is clearly the biggest contingent, after the 78 per cent accounted for by domestic labour. Ireland, France and Italy between them account for almost half of all the City’s EU migrant labour. 

Depending on the nature of any post-exit deal between the UK and EU, the City will almost certainly revert to being less international. Time, perhaps, to dust off the bowler hat and rolled umbrella uniform of 30 years ago.

