Jeremy Corbyn faces no-confidence motion after Brexit vote

2016-06-24

Jeremy Corbyn is facing the biggest test of his leadership after two veteran MPs submitted a motion of no-confidence in an attempt to end his tenure at the helm of the Labour party.

Margaret Hodge, former chair of the public accounts committee, and Ann Coffey, a former aide to Tony Blair, confirmed the move in a letter to the chairman of the Parliamentary Labour party.

The letter calls for a discussion at a meeting of Labour MPs on Monday, where John Cryer, the chair of the Parliamentary Labour party, will decide if it is debated. 

The motion is: “That this PLP has no confidence in Jeremy Corbyn as leader of the Parliamentary Labour party.” The motion has no formal constitutional force but could lead to a secret ballot of Labour MPs on Tuesday.

The novel mechanism may have come about because no MP has volunteered to act as a leadership candidate or even a kamikaze “stalking horse”. The rebels hope that they can produce such a show of hostility to Mr Corbyn that he will resign of his own volition. 

The attempted coup against the leader of the opposition emerged during a morning of Brexit turmoil and coincided with the resignation of David Cameron as prime minister.

For many centrist Labour MPs, the Brexit vote was the final straw after months of growing frustration with their leftwing leader, who was elected last summer. In particular they say that Mr Corbyn campaigned halfheartedly for a Remain vote. 

Ms Hodge said she hoped Mr Corbyn would “do the decent thing and resign”.

“The European referendum was a test of leadership and I think Jeremy failed that test,” she said. He “came out too slowly. He was very halfhearted about his attempts to campaign and Labour voters simply didn’t get the message.”

She said the country was entering “a really tumultuous time” with a general election likely in six to nine months and that “every MP, every member of the Labour party, has to look into their heart in the way I did this morning and ask themselves the question — is Jeremy Corbyn really the right person to see the Labour party through these very tumultuous times?”

Lord Mandelson, former deputy prime minister, said: “At best his voice was curiously muted but when he did say anything, there were mixed messages.”

John Mann, a Labour MP, said Mr Corbyn needed to change his relaxed attitude to immigration, otherwise “Labour should have the same timeframe as the Tories” to get a new leader. 

Rebels believe they have secured the support of at least 50 MPs, reaching the threshold required to launch a formal challenge against the leader. One said that more than half of the PLP had indicated support for the rebellion.

A Labour source said members of the shadow cabinet had signalled their willingness to join the coup. 

“These are serious operators, people who are prepared to get their hands dirty, it goes to a very high level . . . this is about saving the Labour party,” he said.

Reluctantly forced into the vote, the prime minister’s worst fears came true

Many Labour MPs resent Mr Corbyn because of his pacifist outlook, refusal to condone public spending cuts despite the large budget deficit, and lack of managerial expertise.

One MP said his colleagues had resigned themselves to the fact that they would never become cabinet ministers. “It’s no longer about us; we need to sacrifice ourselves to allow others to make it,” he said. 

As dawn broke on Friday Labour MPs were in despair at the sight of millions of their own voters voting to leave the EU.

“So bad, it’s hard to know where to start,” said one. “Scotland will go, Corbyn will hopefully go. Question is: will Labour stay or go? This is existential.”

Mr Corbyn’s allies said the Scottish National party had failed to bring out the Europhile vote north of the border in a “lacklustre campaign with minimal ground activity”.

But Mr Corbyn faces tough questions about whether he contributed to the defeat of Britain Stronger in Europe, the cross-party group arguing for the status quo. 

As a former Eurosceptic, his speeches were sprinkled with criticism of the bloc. On one occasion he was accused by senior colleagues of “sabotage” for criticising what he described as scaremongering Treasury forecasts. 

Some surveys of Labour supporters found that a large number had no idea of the party’s position on EU membership. 

The sense that Mr Corbyn has been facing both ways on the referendum was emphasised on Friday when his aides issued a “script” urging MPs to praise the leader on broadcast media.

The memo told members to insist that their leader was right to put a “critical case for both Remain and reform”. The script said: “In making this argument Labour showed that it is far closer to the centre of gravity of the British public than other political parties . . . Jeremy is uniquely placed as a critical remainer.”

The Labour leader faces criticism from two fronts. Most of the parliamentary Labour party — some 222 MPs — were in favour of staying in the EU. 

The vote against the EU could become a vote against the UK

Many have already turned on Mr Corbyn, arguing that he has risked Britain’s economic prosperity and the future of the UK by failing to campaign vigorously enough.

“Does he bear any responsibility? Of course he did. He could have fought hard for an In vote and instead he prevaricated from the sidelines,” said one MP. 

Another said: “This campaign has showed that he is even more useless than some of us thought . . . that script is unbelievable.”

One reason that Mr Corbyn pulled his punches was that he was wary of alienating many white working class Labour voters, who are in revolt against the EU and large-scale immigration. 

The opposition leader was aware of the backlash that Labour endured after it shared a platform with the Tories during the pro-union Better Together campaign in Scotland in 2014.

Friday’s referendum result was the confirmation of the gulf between Labour’s metropolitan, liberal leadership and its voters in post-industrial regions. 

Simon Danczuk, a backbench MP, described the verdict as the “final disconnection”. 

“They have gone to take us out of Europe, that’s what we’ve seen this morning,” he said. “And when the general election takes place, they aren’t going to come back to Labour.” 

Caroline Flint, former cabinet minister, said the party needed to take time to listen to people’s concerns. “Outside our cities, for a long time, white working class people have felt very left behind,” she said. 

“Large numbers of them voted Leave. For decades we haven’t talked about why Europe is doing good things on prices and investment. When things were going well, the UK government would take the credit.”

One Labour figure said only a handful of colleagues had ever understood the need to listen to white working class voters.

They included the so-called “Blue Labour” movement, set up by Lord Maurice Glasman, a former adviser to Ed Miliband. 

This week Lord Glasman called for Brexit, saying it was “lunacy” to apply EU freedom of movement to people living in low-income eastern European nations.

“That whole Blue Labour movement was only 1 per cent of the party. People who genuinely wanted a more controlled approach to immigration and control of our borders were a tiny minority position in the Labour party,” said the party insider.

“It has been heresy inside the Parliamentary Labour party, with a few exceptions like Gisela Stuart and Frank Field. But it is a majority position among Labour voters.”

John Mills, a Labour donor who backed the Out camp, said the party should have taken a “supportive but critical stance” rather than campaigning so strongly in favour of staying in the EU. 

“Once they started saying that the EU had everything going for it and nothing wrong, it was not a credible position for people in the north of England,” he added. 

