Trump slumps, Fed holds fire and Times Square, Iraq style

2016-06-16

Sign up to receive FirstFT by email here

The former reality TV star may be finding that the same attributes that propelled him to the top of the Republican party — bombast, controversy and xenophobia — don't play in a general election. Fresh polls show him falling in the race. 

The latest poll numbers are “unprecedented and catastrophic” for the Republican party, says Slate’s Jamelle Bouie. “A presidential nominee with this standing doesn’t just lose in the general election; he brings his party down with him, wiping out an entire generation of leaders in one fell swoop. If Trump remains this unpopular through the fall . . . he could cost Republicans control of the Senate and perhaps even the House.” (FT, Slate) 

Keep track of the race with our daily US politics newsletter. Sign up here. (FT)

Democrat claims gun control victory A marathon Democratic filibuster in the wake of the Orlando nightclub massacre came to an end in the US Senate on Thursday morning after Republicans apparently agreed to hold votes on tighter gun control measures. Chris Murphy, a Connecticut Democrat, led the filibuster which lasted for more than 14 hours along with several colleagues. He said a deal had been struck with Republican leaders to hold votes on amendments to expand background checks and ban gun sales to suspected terrorists. (Guardian)

Putin seeks to re-engage Europe If the Kremlin is to be believed, Vladimir Putin spent the best part of the past week getting ready for the St Petersburg International Economic Forum— more time than he devotes even to preparation of Direct Line, his annual heavily scripted televised call-in show. The Russian president intends to use the Davos-style conference to celebrate the return of European neighbours and western investors after two gruelling years of sanctions and hostility. (FT)

Uber rival Didi Chuxing raises $7bn in new capital China’s rival to ride-hailing pioneer Uber has raised more than $7bn from investors and lenders, capping a month that has seen an unprecedented wave of funds pouring into car-booking apps. (FT) 

EgyptAir MS804 wreckage sites found Air crash investigators in Egypt say they have found the main wreckage sites of EgyptAir flight MS804, which plunged into the Mediterranean last month killing all 66 people on board. (FT) 

Yen surges The Japanese currency continued to extend gains against the dollar — surging to Y104, its highest level since August 2014 — after the Bank of Japan kept monetary policy on hold. Haruhiko Kuroda, Bank governor, said after the two-day policy meeting: “The yen’s advance not reflecting [economic] fundamentals is undesirable.” (NAR)

Russian athletes accused of fresh doping violations Russian athletes attempted to bribe or run away from doping officials, while armed officers threatened international drug testers with deportation, according to a report into the country’s doping regime over the past eight months — released days before a decision on whether Russian athletes can compete in this summer’s Olympic Games. (FT) 

Volkswagen The German carmaker is planning a far-reaching shake-up of its sprawling operations that make components, as part of efforts to cut its bloated costs, according to two people briefed on the proposals. The initiative may form part of a new strategy due to be unveiled on Thursday by Matthias Müller, chief executive, which is partly intended to draw a line under the diesel emissions scandal. (FT) 

Deadly draw of the Isis brand In late May, Isis spokesman Abu Muhammad al-Adnani issued a chilling recorded message in which he appealed to loyalists to stay where they were. “The smallest action you do in the heart of their land is better and more enduring to us than what you would if you were with us,” he said. Did Omar Mateen ever listen to that recording? We may never know. But by invoking Isis in his killing spree, he joins the ranks of a new wave of homegrown jihadis whose motives are confounding intelligence and law enforcement agencies. (FT, WaPo) 

In Silicon Valley, Trump is a loser Donald Trump is, at least by Silicon Valley standards, “a loser” — both for what he stands for and because of his business performance, writes Michael Moritz. “Silicon Valley winners are people who fashion something from nothing. Many of them are the sort of people Mr Trump wants to keep from entering America and are victims of prejudice and oppression.” (FT)

What happens after Brexit? In a matter of days, the UK electorate faces its biggest choice in more than a generation — whether to remain in the EU. Read a selection of Financial Times news and analysis of the steps after Brexit. (FT)

How Yahoo derailed Tumblr Marissa Mayer bought the blogging site for $1bn and promised “not to screw it up”. But Tumblr’s stumbles under Yahoo may go down as a cautionary tale of the perils of a large corporation buying a hot start-up. (Mashable) 

Times Square, Iraq style News from Iraq tends to focus on conflict, but the citizens of Basra are for now just trying to enjoy the consumerist pleasures of the city’s new mall — Basra Times Square. (BBC Magazine) 

Noble’s House of woe Founded 30 years ago with $100,000 in capital, Noble rose to become one of Asia’s biggest commodity traders — but now the titan has been brought to its knees by accounting questions, leverage and weak markets. (FT) 

John Authers reports on a quiet reaction to a dovish announcement on interest rates from the Federal Reserve. (FT) 

