Royal Mint reports surge in gold trading before EU vote

2016-06-21

The UK’s Royal Mint online trading platform has seen a one-third rise in transactions this month compared with May, as investors buy gold and silver ahead of the EU referendum. 

The surge in demand for bars and coins has been mirrored by other online bullion sites, with gold’s status as a “haven” asset prompting investors to believe it will appreciate further in the event of a UK vote to leave the EU on Thursday.

Gold prices have risen 5 per cent this month and analysts at HSBC reckon it could derive a boost of 10 per cent if Britain exits the EU. The precious metal touched a near two-year high of $1,315 last week and in sterling terms has risen 21 per cent this year.

The 32 per cent surge in volume over the month has led to a 150 per cent increase in revenue for the Royal Mint this month, said Chris Howard, director of bullion. “Overall since early 2016, demand for precious metals has risen,” he said. 

Rival online gold trading platform BullionVault said its new UK account openings in June had increased by 85 per cent over the past 12 months’ daily average.

“This year’s widening financial and geopolitical risks are just finding a moment of concentration . . . in the high-volatility event of the Brexit referendum,” Adrian Ash, head of research at BullionVault, said.

London-based Pure Gold Company said it had taken on seven extra staff to deal with a rise in enquiries.

“Enquiries are at an all-time high,” chief executive Josh Saul said. “As judgment day approaches we’ve had far more people panic buying. People call up and they’ve never invested in physical gold before — and they’re getting started with a £100,000 purchase.”

Aside from retail buying of physical gold, investors have also sought gold-backed exchange traded funds, which have seen their holdings of the precious metal swell to the highest level since 2013.

Still, gold prices fell for a third day in a row on Tuesday, after polls showed voters in favour of the UK leaving the EU had lost some of their lead over the Remain camp. Gold fell more than 1 per cent to a 10-day low of $1,270.9 a troy ounce. 

“Overnight we have seen two polls, one with Leave in the lead and the other with Remain in the lead. This will make the markets believe that we are in for a close vote and for that reason I would expect precious metals prices to continue sideways [from here],” said David Govett of Marex Spectron, a London-based brokerage.

Whatever the outcome of Thursday’s vote bullion brokers say there are many reasons to own gold, including uncertainty over the global economy, the upcoming US presidential election and central banks introducing negative interest rate policies.

“Our view remains that there are really good reasons to own physical gold but taking position on short-term political outcomes is not one of them,” said Ross Norman, head of bullion brokers Sharps Pixley. “The long-term case for owning gold remains solid — but the short-term one in our view is questionable.” 

