Labour leaders’ failure to listen led to defeat over Brexit

2016-06-24

Jamie Reed, the Labour MP for Copeland in Cumbria, nailed in a tweet the question the UK opposition party needs to ask itself this Friday after the UK’s EU referendum: “It’s an indictment of the UK that many of the poorest will vote to make their lives worse because they don’t believe life can get better.”

The glib answer is immigration. But that is really an emblem for so many other problems in a changing world: from the decline of high streets to social dislocations, from the consequences of the great recession to being unable to get your child into the local primary school.

Political leadership is seeing the complex connections between the simple problems raised on the doorstep and the complex solutions needed. But it starts with listening.

When Tony Blair stood down as Labour leader and prime minister in 2007, there was no contest. To avoid the appearance of a coronation, Gordon Brown committed himself to tour the country, “listening and learning”. As Philip Gould, the late Labour strategist, said to me: “If he had been listening he would have come back talking about nothing except crime and immigration.” He did not do that. And the catastrophic failure of Mr Brown to understand the issue of immigration, let alone to act on it, set Labour on the track that has concluded here with Labour voters being the decisive factor in taking Britain out of the EU.

Remember Gillian Duffy? She raised immigration with Mr Brown in 2010 and for her pains she was called a “bigoted woman”. Mrs Duffy voted Labour but a lot of Labour voters got the message — the disdain for their opinions was real and they left the party, allowing the Conservatives to form a minority government. That defeat — and that revolt over immigration — set the pattern.

Mr Brown was replaced by Ed Miliband, who lost the 2015 election because voters did not trust him on the economy, on welfare or on immigration. Those, of course, are not separate points — they are all related. Migration is feared because it puts strains on the welfare budget, which makes it unaffordable, which leads to a tax-and-spend crisis, which is crystallised in the issue of economic competence. 

The problem for Mr Miliband, from early on, was that he failed the ‘blink test’

Because they are connected they should be, and can be, addressed strategically as well as tactically. This was a strength of Mr Blair, the only Labour leader to win elections in the past 40 years. In 2005 he responded to the debate on immigration with the proposal, later implemented, of an Australian-style points-based immigration system.

But he also responded by continuing to make the argument for free movement of labour, particularly from eastern Europe. He made the geopolitical case for former Communist dictatorships joining the EU and receiving the full benefits. He was still doing that during the referendum campaign. But Mr Miliband sold the pass when he repudiated New Labour and all its actions. In doing so he also repudiated the rhetoric and the progressive arguments. When you do that you are on the run for the rest of your life.

Party leader accused of contributing to Remain defeat through lacklustre campaigning

The problem for Mr Miliband, from early on, was that he failed the “blink test”: when voters shut their eyes, they could not imagine him as a leader. He did not look like a potential future prime minister. That was a big factor in the Scottish independence referendum. Labour voters concluded that there was no chance of a Labour general election victory so there was only one way to get shot of the Tories — and that was to get shot of the UK. That was an entirely understandable position, though primarily emotional rather than logical.

The same thought process was on show on Thursday. A third of Labour voters rejected the Labour party position: a group so sizeable that it is much larger than Leave’s margin of victory. Labour voters took the UK out of the EU because it was the only way they could see to tear down the Tory government. Jeremy Corbyn, the leader, who is facing a vote of no-confidence from his MPs, is unelectable. He is worse on the economy, welfare and immigration than Mr Miliband was — so they had to take the matter into their own hands. 

This time, unlike in Scotland, rebellious Labour voters were on the winning side. And they got what they wanted. Within hours of the result Prime Minister David Cameron had resigned and is leaving Number 10 — something that Mr Corbyn could never achieve.

Why are we here? Who are the guilty men? Mr Miliband and Mr Corbyn. J’accuse! 

The writer is a political strategist and former political secretary to Tony Blair 

