Rodney Leach, merchant banker and politician, 1934-2016

2016-06-17

Just days before the killing of Labour MP Jo Cox stilled the UK’s cacophonous Brexit campaign, Westminster lost a similarly calm and rational voice. Rodney Leach, who died last Sunday aged 82, was a cerebral merchant banker who played a vital role in keeping Britain out of the euro and campaigned for democratic reform in the EU.

For 33 years he was an important part of Jardine Matheson, the Asian trading empire. Yet it is his largely backroom role in Britain’s long-running debate about Europe that marks Lord Leach of Fairford as one of the most influential figures from the City of London.

He denounced the “adversarial claptrap” of the referendum debate. “Brexit will not be an economic disaster and it will not be a utopia,” Leach said before a severe stroke silenced him in mid-April. “Withdrawal from the EU is likely to result in an initial economic cost but Britain can prosper if it takes a liberal approach to trade, immigration and regulation.”

Friends describe a humane, mischievously funny character with a sharp intellect who was highly skilled at bridge. He was a formidable persuader and organiser but kept out of the political spotlight, preferring to do the talking through his campaign groups and in letters to newspapers.

Leach’s interest in Europe arose when his wife Jessica, who survives him along with five children from his first marriage, encouraged him to read the “impenetrable” 1992 Maastricht treaty. He came to see the EU as “a bureaucratic oligarchy, not a democracy”. As calls grew for Britain to join the single currency, he worried that a one-size-fits-all monetary policy would damage national economies.

He founded Business for Sterling in 1998 just when Tony Blair as prime minister, with support from the corporate establishment, was positioning the UK to join the single currency. His group’s effective campaigning did much to persuade Gordon Brown, chancellor at the time, to ditch euro entry plans in 2004.

In 2005 he set up Open Europe, a think-tank dedicated to reforming the EU, which he wanted to see become a “neighbourly alliance” in which each nation could opt in or out of sharing economic sovereignty. Open Europe is neutral in the referendum though board members can express personal views publicly.

Leach had made no such public statement by the time he suffered his stroke, which came while chairing an Open Europe debate. Some thought he would lean towards Remain but in an email to a friend in March he said: “We aren’t ever going to sacrifice our democracy, and the EU cannot ever develop a democracy, as it hasn’t got a demos … So it has to be exit, painful though that may temporarily be.”

Charles Guy Rodney Leach was born in Dublin on June 1 1934 and educated at Harrow and Balliol College, Oxford, where he took a first in Greats (classics) and began an academic career. The Hungarian uprising of 1956 awakened him to politics: he helped to start a relief fund.

He switched to finance, initially working for Greenshields, a brokerage in Montreal, before being recruited to NM Rothschild by Jacob (now Lord) Rothschild, an Oxford friend. As a partner from 1968 and joint head of corporate finance, Leach helped build its presence in the eurobond market and in mergers and acquisitions.

Defenders say department has been evidence-led in its analysis 

Acting for Leasco of the US in its bid for Robert Maxwell’s Pergamon Press in 1969, he rightly suspected Pergamon’s profits were falsely inflated. When invited to his mansion, Leach — in view of Maxwell’s sinister reputation — agreed only on condition that a series of check phone calls were to be made to the house. If Leach did not answer, police would be called. Maxwell is said to have been untroubled by the arrangement.

In 1976, Leach left Rothschild to work for Lebanese financier Edmond Safra before joining Matheson & Co, Jardine Matheson’s London holding company, in 1983. He remained an executive director at Matheson’s Lombard Street office for the rest of his life — along the way devising the cross-ownership share structure that maintains control by the Keswick family. He was also central to transferring the domicile of group companies from Hong Kong to Bermuda before China took back control of its southern territory.

Leach was made a life peer in 2006. In 2011 he chaired the No to AV campaign that defeated electoral changes at the last UK-wide referendum. Conservative MP Charlotte Leslie summed him up on Twitter: “A gentleman and brilliant mind. Crystal clarity amongst mess and bluster. Huge loss.”

