White House Countdown – Show me the money

2016-06-23

Sign up for our daily US politics newsletter here.

Donald Trump has taken another step to convince Republican donors to back his White House ambitions by extinguishing the $50m in personal loans he has given his campaign over the past year. Wealthy Republicans have stayed on the sidelines for many reasons – but one was concern that the tycoon might use contributions to pay back the debt rather than hiring more staff and building up election campaign operations in key states across the country.

Whether Trump can convince the donors that he bashed during the primaries to open the spigots, well the proof will be in the pudding, or the haggis as the Scottish might say. Trump is on his way to Scotland to visit his golf course – a curious choice for a presidential candidate who likes to lambast President Barack Obama for playing too much golf. Reporters were offered the chance to travel on his charter plane, with a minimum price tag of $10,000 for the flights.

Hillary Clinton kindly provided some inflight entertainment after her campaign produced a video about Mr Trump whom the narrator declared had always been “seen as something of a grotesque American curiosity” in Britain. It quoted British Prime Minister David Cameron calling his remarks on banning Muslims “divisive, stupid and wrong”, and the newly elected mayor of London Sadiq Khan’s comment that Trump had “ignorant views about Islam”.

Trump meanwhile has created his own material with the first “Crooked Hillary 10 Legendary Lies” video. Tom Daschle, former Democratic Senate majority leader, recently told me that this would be one of the ugliest elections in history. I bet that you ain’t seen nothing yet. Tune in tomorrow to find out what Trump thinks about the outcome of Brexit.

You can follow us on Twitter at @Dimi, @Courtney_FT and @neiLmunshi. Thanks for reading, Demetri Sevastopulo, Washington Bureau Chief.

Click here for full FT coverage of the 2016 race.

On the trail

Tim Kaine: top Clinton VP pick The Virginia senator – and former governor – is seen by many as the safest bet, with the least upside but also, crucially, the least downside (including a governor who will appoint a Democratic successor should be become vice president). (Politico)

GOP senator touts opposition to Trump A new ad from Illinois Senator Mark Kirk, widely seen as the most vulnerable Republican up for reelection, declares: “Mark Kirk bucked his party to say Donald Trump is not fit to be commander in chief.” It’s the most explicit sign yet of down-ballot Republicans fleeing their likely standard bearer. (Slate)

Drawing the line A long look at how a flood of money won statehouses throughout the country for Republicans, who used them to redraw congressional districts and turned America from blue to red. (New Yorker)

Chart of the day

This map of the places that were hit hardest by the recession may explain some of the economic anxiety in the the US. (WaPo)

Number of the day

4.3% How much Clinton leads Trump in Arizona, a reliably Republican state with a large Latino population, in a sign of just how unconventional this election is. (Phoenix Business Journal)

Soundbites

“There’s no successful businessman in America who actually thinks the most successful businessman in the country is Donald Trump. I know those guys, and so do you, and I guarantee you, that’s not their view.” -Obama. (Bloomberg)

Campaign commentary

Why dumping Trump would be even worse than keeping him (Michael Taube, WaPo)

Hillary gossip redux (Gail Collins, NYT)

Paul Ryan, the most overrated intellect in Washington (Ian Millhiser, Think Progress)

Political sideshow

Big Trump, little Trump The only appropriate running mate for Trump? A smaller version of the man himself. (Tonight Show with Jimmy Fallon)

Today’s RCP poll average

