Pessimistic Brexiters found their fizz as victory approached

2016-06-24

It was 4am, and victory wasn’t official — but Nigel Farage knew he’d won. 

“Dawn is breaking on an independent United Kingdom,” the leader of the UK Independence party bellowed to supporters at London’s Millbank Tower. After more than 20 years of campaigning against Brussels, he finally had his moment. 

What a contrast to the scene just six hours earlier, when Mr Farage suggested Remain had won the referendum due to a last-minute voter registration drive. “Win or lose this battle, we will win this war,” he said philosophically. 

Many Brexiters shared his pessimism over pink champagne and fish and chips at the Millbank party. Arron Banks, the insurance millionaire who says he has spent £6m on the Brexit campaign, had received an opinion poll at lunchtime showing a 52-48 per cent lead for Leave — but he did not believe it. Instead, he shrugged that the EU’s economic contradictions meant that it would collapse eventually. 

Then shortly after midnight, an emphatic Leave victory from Sunderland sent the faithful into ecstasy. “Blown them out of the water!” exclaimed one man. Brexiters allowed themselves to dream once more. 

“Out! Out! Out!” cried the hardcore of the Millbank party. When a chart of the pound sinking against the dollar appeared on the big-screen TV, it was cheered as a harbinger of victory. As the alcohol flowed, results from Wales, Swindon, Nuneaton and then Sheffield made that victory a reality. 

I don’t care if the value of my house — it’s a big house — falls because it might mean my children can buy a house one day

“Let them bleed!” celebrated Linda, a long-time anti-EU supporter. “I don’t care if the value of my house — it’s a big house — falls because it might mean my children can buy a house one day.”

Attendees at the Millbank party were bitter at how the UK government had campaigned, with the repeated use of dire official warnings and economic forecasts. One Conservative donor fumed at having been labelled “economically illiterate” by George Osborne, the chancellor. “That was wrong,” the donor said. According to one poll, nearly half of Leave voters thought the vote would be rigged against them. 

Privately, figures in the Leave campaign also admitted to their own failings, particularly the acrimonious divide between Mr Bank’s Leave.EU group and the official Out campaign, Vote Leave. 

Yet they had been cheered by an enthusiastic reception as they knocked on doors in recent weeks. In the 1990s, leaving Europe was a preoccupation of the right, but by linking it to concerns over immigration Mr Farage has appealed to voters across the political spectrum. 

The Millbank party demonstrated that strange coalition, which includes the libertarian right and the anti-globalisation left. “I’m not entirely used to rooftop free bars with Union Flag bunting,” said Oliver Hewitson, an activist with Labour Leave. 

What was your initial feeling after you heard the results? What questions do you have now? Share your thoughts with the FT community here.

Like others, Mr Hewitson sought to claim victory even if the call for Brexit fell short. “Anything over 40 per cent for Leave is a very serious blow for the establishment. I hope that other European countries step up.”

By 4am the Leave campaign looked certain to take more than 50 per cent of the vote and Mr Farage proclaimed “a victory for ordinary people, a victory for decent people”. 

Even in triumph, he managed to offend: “We have done it without a bullet being fired,” he said in his speech, a remark that sits uneasily with the killing of the Labour MP Jo Cox last week. 

The minds of Mr Farage’s supporters had moved on to how to make sure the UK government obeyed the referendum result. “The job is to keep those guys on track,” said Sharon Bierer. “They’re going to do everything they possibly can to make us stay in, one way or another.”

