Brexit: How wealth managers are advising their clients

2016-06-24

Wealth managers and stockbrokers urged clients to exercise caution and not to lose sight of buying opportunities as the FTSE 100 dropped by 8 per cent in initial trading on Friday morning following the Leave victory in the UK’s EU referendum. 

Before UK markets opened, investors were moving into assets commonly believed to be uncorrelated with the UK, European or global economies. 

Bonds issued by the governments of the US and the UK, which are generally thought to carry very little risk of not being repaid, have been snapped up. 

The interest yield on 10-year US Treasury bonds, which falls as the price of the securities rise, hit a near four-year low of 1.49 per cent, reflecting heavy buying of these so-called “haven” securities. The price of gold has risen around 5 per cent to a two-year high and now stands at $1,324 an ounce. 

Shares of household name British companies plunged, meanwhile, with Lloyds Banking Group trading 30 per cent lower and Marks and Spencer falling 20 per cent. 

Investors “should not overtrade” in response to these dramatic market moves, warned Russ Mould, research director of private client investment broker AJ Bell. 

“Do not try and second guess short-term money flows,” he said. “Wait until we have some sense of what the effect on companies’ cash flows of Brexit will be. It could turn out that stocks have been oversold today, and markets will eventually reflect this.” 

Mark Dampier, research director of investment platform Hargreaves Lansdown, said a large proportion of businesses in the FTSE 100, from miners such as Rio Tinto and BHP Billiton to brewer SABMiller, derive most of their sales from overseas. 

While this may moderate the effects of gyrations in the UK economy on these stocks, Mr Dampier said, they were also in line for an “earnings upgrade” because the stronger dollar against the pound would boost the value of profits they report in sterling. 

“We are advising clients to stay invested or even increase their exposure to the FTSE 100, drip feeding money in to smooth out the effects of any politics-related market gyrations in the days and weeks ahead,” Mr Dampier said. 

Ben Kumar, investment manager at Seven Investment Management, cautioned against “rash decisions”. 

“If you have no immediate need to withdraw money, then you should remain invested. Those who sell tend to get out and not get back in again in time, and if you are genuinely investing and not speculating, that should leave a lot of opportunities to make something of the market movements.” 

Many private investors, however, were selling on Friday morning. Tony Cross of Trustnet, the financial platform, said that as of 8.30am, the value of sell orders the group was processing was double that of the buy orders.

In a note to clients, analysts at investment bank Liberum Capital recommended buying shares in pharmaceutical, chemicals and technology companies that make most of their money in US dollars. Sterling’s weakness would boost the pound value of the dollars these companies receive from clients, increasing their reported profits. 

A comparable currency translation trade sent investors flocking to Japanese stocks in 2013, when the yen fell against the dollar because of central bank policy to stimulate the economy. 

In a note, Liberum cautioned clients against buying retailers’ stocks: “Several retailers source their product in [US dollars] or with a USD peg, to sell into either Europe or the UK, so there could be a negative transactional impact to this sector.”

Economists are widely predicting damage to the UK economy, which may prompt the Bank of England to cut interest rates from their already low level of 0.5 per cent to stimulate financial markets. 

Bill O’Neill, head of the UK investment office of UBS Wealth Management, said: “We would expect a prolonged period of uncertainty and consumers will very quickly sense the challenges out there. The Bank of England will be under pressure to cut interest rates and/or reintroduce quantitative easing.”

The vote also prompted comments about the attractions of Britain as a hub for the wealthy. Mr O’Neill said: “Clearly this is going to require some sort of reconsideration on the part of wealthy; it may cast a cloud over London as a financial centre, but much of this will be watch and see in terms of policy.”

Yves Bonzon, chief investment officer at Julius Baer, warned that Brexit could prove beneficial for other centres of wealth around the world, such as Switzerland and Singapore — at the expense of London. “It’s probably a positive for places that have good political governance with medium-to-long-term objectives as opposed to those affected by short-term political motives,” he said.

