Brexit would be an irrevocable mistake, says Sir John Major

2016-06-20

Sir John Major, the former Conservative prime minister, has said Britain will not seek to rejoin the EU if it votes to leave in the forthcoming referendum. In an interview with the Financial Times, Sir John described a British exit as “irrevocable”.

“Frankly, we are too proud and independent a nation to go crawling back to Europe in four or five or six years’ time saying, ‘we’ve made a mistake, can we come back, please?’ ” he said. “I don’t think you would ever get a majority for that inside the House of Commons or inside the country simply because of our pride.” 

Sir John’s time as British prime minister from 1990 to 1997 was impeded by internal Conservative party arguments about European integration, particularly over the ratification of the Maastricht treaty in 1992. This infighting contributed to the party’s thumping defeat in the 1997 general election. He declined to speculate how the Conservative party would reunite after enduring similar infighting during the EU referendum campaign.

“I don’t know what will happen after the result and it may depend on what the result is and how clear-cut the result is,” said Sir John. But he urged Tory malcontents not to force a change in leadership. “I very much hope that David Cameron remains as prime minister.”

Some Tories have dismissed Mr Cameron’s renegotiation of Britain’s EU membership as insubstantial but Sir John believes some of his enemies are being unfair. 

“Before he went there were people setting out hurdles which they knew and he knew and everyone knew could not possibly be achieved in negotiation,” he said. “And the purpose of doing that was to say — the moment he came back — that it was an insubstantial negotiation and it had failed.”

Sir John characterised the referendum, which will take place on Thursday, as “a battle between economics and emotion”. He said: “There is not a single international authority that has anything kind to say about Britain’s future if we leave the European Union.

“To fight for the status quo, to fight for the future international prestige of the United Kingdom is a much more difficult case to put across than the simple mantras of ‘we want our country back’.”

Michael Gove, the Eurosceptic justice secretary, has suggested British voters have “had enough of experts”— something Sir John acknowledged had struck a chord. “There is a degree of truth that they are tired of listening to the experts. But the experts are actually pointing out what will happen to their living standards.”

————————-

UK’s EU referendum: full coverage and analysis

View the FT’s comprehensive guide to the vote on whether Britain should stay in Europe, with all the latest news, analysis and commentary from both sides of the debate. See more 

————————-

Pro-EU campaigners argue a vote to leave the EU could lead to another referendum on Scottish independence, something Sir John said was “overwhelmingly likely — not perhaps, immediately but at a suitable time when they think they can win, [then] the Scottish National Party would hold a second referendum.

“If we were out of Europe and they [Scotland] wished to go back into the European Union . . . Britain would lose Scotland. We would be left with a rump of England, a very likely highly discontented Wales and Northern Ireland.”

While some Remain campaigners have struggled to address public concerns about immigration, Sir John suggested politicians should be more vocal in explaining the economic benefits of migration.

“Try and deal with our transport system without Europeans. Try and get a coffee in a hotel or a coffee house or anywhere else without being served by a European. They are integral to the way we actually live. And the belief that the immigration from Europe is bringing in lots of people, as the Leave campaign say, who are going to be undesirables in one sort or another is simply not true.”

Try and deal with our transport system without Europeans. Try and get a coffee in a hotel or a coffee house or anywhere else without being served by a European. They are integral to the way we actually live.

Sir John also argued that Britain’s international influence would be reduced by Brexit — citing the example of how sanctions were imposed against Russia by the EU. “If we had imposed sanctions on Russia, [President Vladimir] Putin would have laughed. But through the European Union, we were able to put real pressure on him and hold back the policy that he otherwise would have followed.”

If Britain did vote to leave the EU. he said, the rest of continent would suffer, too. “Europe will diminish. Europe will have a lesser voice. The cradle of modern civilisation will have a lesser voice than it has at the present time . . . do we really want the world to be left for [Chinese] President Xi [Jinping] and perhaps President [Donald] Trump, or even America and China to dance around without a significant European influence?”

Watch the FT’s Lionel Barber speak to John Major www.ft.com/major.

