UK $1.1bn stock fund withdrawals second largest on record

2016-06-17

UK stock funds have suffered their second largest withdrawals on record as investors braced for the referendum on the country’s membership of the EU.

Funds invested in UK equities recorded $1.1bn of redemptions in the week to June 15, the eighth consecutive week of outflows from the asset class and second only to a $1.8bn withdrawal at the start of 2015. British bond funds counted their first redemptions since the start of May, according to flows tracked by EPFR.

Nearly $3bn has been pulled from UK stock portfolios over the past eight weeks as the Leave campaign gained ground. Four-fifths of surveys released over the past week gave the Leave camp an edge in the June 23 referendum, with Remain trailing 43 per cent to 48 per cent, an FT poll of polls showed.

Nerves have frayed, with stock indices in the US reversing much of the year’s earlier gains and European bourses falling deeper into negative territory. The UK FTSE 100 has fallen 3.5 per cent since the start of June, on par for its worst monthly performance since last August.

“Up until the past week there had not been a lot of risk off or elevated volatility,” said Marc Bushallow, managing director of fixed income at asset manager Manning & Napier. “You’ve now seen significant risk haven flows into Treasuries and volatility has finally picked up a bit.”

Investors sought out the safety of the US Treasury and cut allocations to riskier emerging market funds. Sovereign bond yields have fallen deeper into negative territory in Germany, Switzerland and Japan, while yields on US government paper have neared a record low set four years ago.

“The ripples of concern over next week’s UK referendum are fanning out across financial markets,” said Douglas Porter, chief economist with BMO. “One of the biggest concerns about a Brexit vote would be the possibility that other EU members — and specifically those in the euro, unlike Britain — would be tempted to follow the UK lead. This is causing some reliving of the bad memories from the euro crisis.”

Funds invested in Treasuries added $773m over the past week despite a decision that was looming from the US central bank. Policymakers at the Federal Reserve left rates unchanged and trimmed longer-term interest rate expectations on Wednesday, prompting a late-day rally.

The yield on the US 10-year note, which moves inversely to its price, closed below 1.6 per cent this week for the first time since 2012.

Investors shifted out of riskier asset classes as they prepared for the UK vote. Emerging market equity funds recorded $1.9bn of redemptions after two consecutive weeks of inflows. Separate data tracked by Lipper showed the seventh straight week of withdrawals from US-based stock funds, which suffered $3.4bn of outflows in the week to Wednesday.

eric.platt@ft.com

Twitter: @ericgplatt

