Free Lunch: Economic home truths

2016-06-21

Giving horsetrading a good name

Last month I suggested that a dose of market fundamentalism could improve European refugee policy. A system of tradable refugee quotas, modelled on the existing carbon emissions trading system, could both draw the sting from the perceived attack on national sovereignty (since nations would have a choice between accepting more or less of their share of a commonly agreed overall intake, and be paid or pay to do so) and achieve a more efficient allocation of the burden and benefit of the ensuing population increase.

The urgency of finding policies that can address the problem and pass political hurdles is clear from the fact that the number of displaced people in the world is the highest on record since the establishment of the UN’s refugee agency in 1950.

As it turns out, several exciting designs for such schemes are being developed. One proposal comes from Duke University legal scholars Joseph Blocher and Mitu Gulati, who advocate the establishment of a legal financial claim for refugees on their home country, which would encourage host nations to compete for refugees. “In short,” the authors write, “international law can and should give refugees a legal asset, give host nations incentives to accept them and give oppressive countries of origin the bill.”

Another proposal has been developed by Hillel Rapoport and Jesús Fernández-Huertas Moraga. Their tradable quota system aims to improve the allocation of the cost of the international public good of refugee admission, as well as the incentives for shouldering the burden. Their design, summarised in a London School of Economics blog post by Rapoport as well as by Brookings, includes an intriguing matching mechanism that elicits the refugees’ preferences between different host countries and makes use of that information for burden-sharing. In Rapoport’s words: “The advantage of a tradable quota system is that it allows for the revealing of information on the true costs of hosting refugees in the participating countries, and it allows countries to exploit their comparative advantages in either ‘hosting’ or ‘funding’.”

We should be under no illusion that these schemes are close to implementation; they are still on academics’ drawing boards. But they are generating interest among policymakers, as a Q&A with Rapoport reports. The plain fact is that the refugee challenge is not going away, and the policies Europe has so far come up with are woefully not up to the task. Innovative solutions therefore deserve a wide hearing, so that policymakers can consider promising proposals as soon as (or preferably sooner than) they have rejected all the worse ones.

Brexit watch

Economists for Brexit, the one group of economists that foresees a post-EU unilateral free trade regime that will boost Britain’s national income, have been comprehensively refuted by LSE researchers (with a further refutation of the Brexit group’s response here). Now come Economists for Remain — a star-studded group of the most esteemed economists in the land and internationally, including 12 Nobel laureates — who “feel compelled to speak out on the risks of leaving and opportunities from remaining in the EU”.

Michael Gove will perhaps repeat that the British people have had enough of experts. But that surely does not include FT readers. So here are some more referendum-relevant facts:

FT economics editor Chris Giles has put together 7 charts that summarise the economics of Britain’s EU membership. Among other things, they cover economic growth (Britain’s per capita income grew the slowest of all the G7 countries before it joined the EU and have grown the fastest of all since then — see chart below), immigration (which has always been larger from non-EU countries than EU ones, and in any case has at most a vanishingly small negative effect on UK wages), and regulations (Britain has one of the most lightly regulated product markets in the world).

Maria Damanaki asks whether Brexit would really help Britain’s fishing communities. Among the interesting findings are that the UK fishing industry makes the most profit in Europe, and that fisheries employment, which has almost halved in the UK since 1970, has fallen even more steeply in Italy, Spain and Portugal. Her analysis adds to the facts presented by Free Lunch recently and confirms what we suggested: most of fishermen’s plight has little to do with the EU and everything to do with overfishing that preceded the Common Fisheries Policy; with the huge advances in technology that make many small fishing vessels obsolete; and with policy decisions over which the UK government retains autonomous control.

And finally, International Monetary Fund researchers indirectly give credence to the majority of economic analyses of Brexit that think worsened access to the single market would reduce productivity. The IMF has measured the effect of trade barriers on imported inputs into domestic production: each one percentage point reduction in tariff barriers improves productivity by two per cent in downstream industries. The effect is larger in economies more friendly to foreign direct investment — such as Britain’s.

Other readables

Numbers news

To receive Martin Sandbu's Free Lunch by email every workday, sign up here.

