Wall Street braces for sharp sell-off post Brexit

2016-06-24

Tin hats on.

Wall Street is set to lurch sharply lower on Friday after a shock decision by the UK to leave the EU sent markets crashing in Asia and Europe.

Having closed on Thursday within striking distance of its all-time high, futures suggest that the S&P 500 could drop by as much as 3.2 per cent when the opening bell rings in New York less than four hours’ time. The Nasdaq is also expected to drop by more than 3 per cent while e-mini futures are pointing to a 2.6 per cent slide for the Dow Jones Industrial Average.

Uncertainty over the potential fallout from the UK’s exit from the EU has sent shockwaves across global markets. The British pound plunged by as much as 11 per cent to its lowest level since 1985 and stock markets from Tokyo to Germany clocked in their worst one-day losses in years.

At pixel time:

Risk aversion was on full display as investors rushed into haven assets. Frenzied demand high grade government paper pushed yields on the US 10 year down by nearly 24 basis points to 1.509 per cent – the lowest in nearly four years.

Elsewhere, German 10 year bond yields fell to a record low of -0.087 per cent while those for Japan and Switzerland are a hair away from their all time lows after tumbling to -0.17 per cent and -0.534 per cent respectively. The Swiss National Bank also became the first among its peers to step in as the flight to safety ran up the Swiss franc.

By contrast, investors dumped European peripheral bonds, with yields on 10-year Greek debt up by more than 77 basis points to 8.3 per cent while those for Portugal rose nearly 15 basis points to 3.2 per cent.

“The UK’s momentous decision to leave the EU brings long-lasting political and economic consequences,” said BlackRock in a note to clients on Friday. “We expect the UK divorce to be messy, drawn out and costly…We see a weaker euro over time and pressure on European shares, credit and peripheral bonds such as Italian government debt due to likely European job losses and lower growth. We expect limited pressure on government budgets, however, as high-quality government bonds are in demand in a low-rate world.”

