UK carmakers double down in fight against Brexit

2016-06-20

Britain’s carmakers have cautioned that leaving the EU would hamstring the UK’s booming automotive industry.

Some of the country’s largest manufacturers — Jaguar Land Rover, Toyota, BMW and Vauxhall — on Monday issued a renewed pledge to protect jobs and investment by voting to remain.

Other major manufacturers such as Nissan and Ford have already said they would prefer the UK to remain part of the EU, although none of the companies have said they will close UK plants in the event of a Brexit.

The UK’s car industry is spurring, with the country on track to produce more vehicles than at any time in its history.

By 2020 Britain is expected to make 2m cars a year — higher than the automotive industry’s heyday in the 1970s.

Some 80 per cent of the cars made in the UK are exported, with almost 60 per cent of those destined for Europe.

The sector supports 800,000 jobs in Britain and contributes an estimated £15.5bn to the economy.

But the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, the industry body, has warned about the impact of a Brexit on the sector’s success.

Mike Hawes, boss of the SMMT, said leaving would “jeopardise” the industry’s success “by increasing costs, making our trading relationships uncertain and creating new barriers to our single biggest and most important market, Europe”.

He was echoed by some of the country’s largest manufacturers.

————————-

UK’s EU referendum: full coverage and analysis

View the FT’s comprehensive guide to the vote on whether Britain should stay in Europe, with all the latest news, analysis and commentary from both sides of the debate. See more 

————————-

Speaking on Monday, Ken Gregor, chief financial officer of Jaguar Land Rover, said the company’s European supply chain had been “fundamental” to growth.

“Remaining in the EU — our largest market — will increase Jaguar Land Rover’s chances to grow, create jobs and attract investment in future technologies.”

Dr Ian Robertson, a board member of BMW, said many of the regulations affecting the UK and carmakers would remain in place even if Britain extracted itself from the EU.

Rory Harvey, chairman of Vauxhall, said: “We believe not to be part of the EU would be undesirable for our business and the sector as a whole.”

Tony Walker from Toyota’s UK manufacturing arm said membership of the EU “is best for our business and for our competitiveness in the longer term”.

The SMMT’s Mike Hawes added: “There should be no ambiguity about the sector’s views ahead of such a critical vote.”

A poll carried out by the motor body in March found just 9 per cent of its members were in favour of leaving the EU, while three quarters said leaving would hurt their business.

But the survey also highlighted frustrations among motor groups over the EU.

Some 60 per cent said they wanted better regulation and a reduction of red tape, while half said they wanted more consistency across EU countries when it comes to applying existing rules.

