Dismay in Dublin over Brexit

2016-06-24

Ireland’s prime minister has promised to maintain “a strong and very close relationship with the UK” despite the result of the EU referendum, which has been greeted with dismay in Dublin.

Speaking after a cabinet meeting on Friday, a sombre Enda Kenny said the government’s priority was to “protect and enhance this country’s interests”, which included continued membership of the EU, the future of Northern Ireland, common travel between the two islands, and trade flows.

“I am very sorry that the result of the referendum is for the UK to leave the EU,” Mr Kenny said. “However, the British people have spoken clearly and we fully respect their decision.” He said the EU and the UK needed to use “wisely” the months before any exit negotiations began. “I’d like to reiterate that while Ireland’s future lies within the EU, Ireland’s strong and close relationship with the UK will remain.”

Mr Kenny’s subdued mood reflected the shock in Dublin about Britain’s decision to leave the EU. The referendum result turns on its head four decades of Irish policy towards Britain and Northern Ireland. It could disrupt trade flows and already there are calls for a “border poll”, which could reignite calls to reunify Ireland.

The dismay reflects the fact that the two countries joined the then European Economic Community on the same day in 1973. Relations built up at European level over more than 40 years have never been better; the two countries often found themselves on the same side in negotiations and disputes in Brussels.

Now, Ireland feels that it is the most exposed of any EU member state to Brexit. “The UK’s decision presents this country with one of its greatest challenges since independence,” said Tom Arnold, director-general of the Institute for International and European Affairs, a Dublin think-tank. 

The government unveiled details of a contingency plan it said had been in preparation for months to deal with the consequences of Brexit. Its aim is to minimise the risks to Ireland from the UK EU exit negotiations that will follow and the plan is expected to include a concerted diplomatic and trade push to reiterate Ireland’s commitment both to the EU and to an open and competitive investment environment.

Our policy must be to fight against any backsliding into the bad old days of border checkpoints.”

However, the biggest challenge for Dublin is how Brexit will affect Northern Ireland. The province voted by a clear but not resounding majority — 56 to 44 per cent — to remain in the EU. The Good Friday Agreement that cemented the peace settlement in the province in 1998 after the Troubles is in essence predicated on the Republic and the UK being in the EU — there is a specific reference in the text to the two countries as “EU partners”.

Mr Kenny said the implications for Northern Ireland and for north/south relations — which are reasonably amicable — would be “a particular priority for the government”. He promised to approach the issue “in the same spirit of partnership that has underpinned the peace process and transformed relations on this island since the Good Friday Agreement”.

Gerry Adams, leader of Sinn Féin, the Irish nationalist party, said on Friday that the Irish government had a “responsibility” under the Good Friday Agreement and “has to make sure the [Northern Ireland] assembly and the whole island are represented [in exit negotiations]”. 

“The British government doesn’t have a mandate to represent the people of the north in negotiations with the EU. The Irish government has a responsibility to ensure that the interests of the entire island are looked after. It needs to uphold the Good Friday Agreement — it’s an international agreement and the Irish government is a co-guarantor of that. We cannot have border posts coming back to reinforce partition.”

How any break-up is carried out will have a decisive impact on Britain for generations

Brendan Boyle, a Pennsylvania congressman, said the US would “strongly oppose” the return of a hard border between the republic and NI. “Our policy must be to fight against any backsliding into the bad old days of border checkpoints.”

The Irish government said it would also “do its utmost” to maintain the common travel area between the UK and Ireland, which allows passport-free travel between the two islands.

There have already been calls from Sinn Féin, which is in a partnership government in Belfast, for a “border poll” that would be the first step towards a united Ireland. Martin McGuinness, Northern Ireland’s deputy first minister and senior Sinn Féin figure, said the UK government had to “allow the people of the north to have their own say on their own future”.

There was no sign on Friday that political parties in the Republic were prepared to back that call. Such a poll can be initiated only by the British government. If a clamour for a border poll began to develop in Dublin, Mr Kenny could find it hard to resist demanding one from Westminster. “There could be a lot of pressure on the government to do this and it would be difficult to oppose,” said Aidan Regan, a political scientist at University College Dublin.

Dublin’s other big challenge will be to ensure that it can renegotiate the best possible relationship with the UK, especially over trade and travel, while maintaining its closeness to the other EU members. Mr Kenny reiterated Ireland’s determination to remain in the EU and said Dublin had built up strong partnerships with the other members and with the EU institutions over the past four decades.

Additional reporting by Demetri Sevastopulo

