White House Countdown – Money, money, money

2016-06-21

Sign up for our daily US politics newsletter here.

Donald Trump must be looking forward to his trip to Scotland later this week, where most people will be more focussed on the outcome of the Brexit referendum than the terrible headlines that have plagued the tycoon in recent weeks. After firing his campaign manager Corey Lewandowski on Monday, it emerged later that evening that Hillary Clinton ended May with $41m more in the bank than Mr Trump whose campaign raised a paltry $3.1m in the month.

Trump dismissed concerns about his fundraising on Tuesday, saying he “understands money better than anybody”. But he conceded that he was struggling to win over some Republicans, meaning that he might be forced to rely on his own cash to fund the election. Republicans – and certainly Clinton – are watching closely to see whether the tycoon will pivot to a more traditional campaign, or whether he will continue with the “lean” model that got him this far.

In a speech on the economy, Clinton asserted that Trump would bankrupt the US in the same way that he ran his casinos into the ground. She is getting better at needling Trump, judging by this line: “He’s written a lot of books bout business — but they all seem to end at Chapter 11 … He bankrupted his company not once, not twice, but four times.”

Trump is planning his own speech in New York on Wednesday morning, so tune in tomorrow for the latest from Trumpistan.

The Trump campaign also revealed it was about to roll out a new website called LyingCrookedHillary.com, saying it would “showcase some of Clinton’s most disastrous lies to the American people”. In a statement, the campaign said people could receive early access by texting “TRUMP” to 88022. There was no small print, but I assume “terms and conditions apply.”

You can follow us on Twitter at @Dimi, @Courtney_FT and @neiLmunshi. Thanks for reading.

-Demetri Sevastopulo, Washington Bureau Chief.

Click here for full FT coverage of the 2016 race.

On the trail

Clinton narrows VP shortlist It’s come down to Massachusetts Senator Elizabeth Warren – a progressive favourite and blistering Trump critic – Virginia Senator Tim Kaine – the well-liked former governor of a battleground state – and Housing and Urban Development Secretary Julian Castro of Texas, a rising star in the party. (AP)

Will Trump swallow the GOP whole? A long look at the identity crisis roiling the Republican party. (NYT)

Trump turns to lukewarm Ohio GOP to woo voters Trump is outsourcing his campaign to the very Republican establishment he’s spent months bashing. Some Republicans – particular those in Ohio – aren’t so keen on helping the brash former reality TV star. (Columbus Dispatch)

Charts of the day

Trump’s campaign coffers are not doing so well, but his companies seem to be. This is what his campaign paid his various subsidiaries, though it doesn’t include the over $400,000 the campaign paid to use his Mar-a-Lago club in Florida. In total about 20 per cent of campaign spending goes to Trump businesses. (MarketWatch)

Numbers of the day

$42m-$1m That’s how much cash on hand the Clinton camp has vs what the Trump camp has, a historically deep deficit. (NYT)

Soundbites

“Maybe he isn’t as rich as he claims.” -Clinton, in a speech painting Trump as an economic disaster and failed businessman, while addressing his refusal to release his tax returns. (FT)

“We don’t know anything about Hillary in terms of religion. Now, she’s been in the public eye for years and years, and yet there’s nothing out there.” – Trump, who spent years questioning President Barack Obama’s faith and implying he was a Muslim, in a closed-door speech to religious leaders. (NYMag)

“This meeting marks the end of the Christian Right. The premise of the meeting in 1980 was that only candidates that reflected a biblical worldview and good character would gain our support. Today, a candidate whose worldview is greed and whose god is his appetites (Philippians 3) is being tacitly endorsed by this throng…This is a day of mourning.” – Michael Farris, longtime leader in the Christian right, on Trump’s conference of religious leaders. (Facebook)

Campaign commentary

US workforce dropouts explain Trump’s rise (Ed Luce, FT)

The case for Elizabeth Warren (Benjamin Wallace-Wells, New Yorker)

Can you insult your way to the White House? (Emma Roller, NYT)

Trump isn’t running a bad campaign – he’s not running a campaign at all (Chris Cillizza, WaPo)

Political sideshow

Trump’s Mad Men Buried beneath the list of Trump-related companies on that campaign spending disclosure was $35,000 paid to someone called “Draper Sterling”, which combines the surnames of two of the main characters on the critically-acclaimed drama. A reporter went to the suburban home listed as the address for the firm and discovered a positively Don Draper-esque mystery. (Slate)

Today’s RCP poll average

