Opening Quote: sparkly sterling; Electra shake-up; Majestic Wine

2016-06-20

Sterling and markets are surging as sentiment swings back towards a Remain vote in the UK’s EU referendum. FT Opening Quote, with commentary by City Editor Jonathan Guthrie, is your early Square Mile briefing. You can sign up for the full newsletter here.

It is hard to understate the significance of this week’s referendum on EU membership. If the Leave camp wins, it would be the biggest event in the UK’s economic relations with the continent since sterling crashed out of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism in 1992.

The pound rallied in Asian morning trading after polls showed Leave losing ground. Sterling rose as much as 1.9 per cent to $1.4623. Asian shares also made a modest recovery. Polls over the weekend suggested the Leave and Remain camps were neck-and-neck, following a brief cessation of campaigning triggered by the murder of MP Jo Cox.

Global market jitters around the Brexit vote appear to overstate the likely economic impact of Leave winning, which would be most heavily felt in the UK. The referendum may therefore be seen as a flashpoint for volatility that was building up already. A proportion of asset managers privately believe a serious downturn in equities is overdue.

Dame Kate Barker, a former Bank of England rate setter and senior City figure, has resigned from the board of Electra Private Equity, where shareholder activist Edward Bramson recently became chief executive. Francesca Barnes, another non-executive director has also resigned.

Concerns have been raised about the governance of the business, in which Mr Bramson’s Sherborne vehicle holds a large stake.

GlaxoSmithKline has announced positive results from a pivotal Phase III study of a treatment for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. This deployed the so-called “closed” triple combination therapy, which is seen as having great potential by physicians and investors.

Less impressively, biotech group Circassia says a treatment for people allergic to cats has failed to pass its own Phase III trials. The placebo did well too, suggesting people who say those of us who start itching and weeping in response to the animals just don’t like them very much.

Majestic Wines has announced a 75 per cent drop in full year pre-tax profits, but says sales are starting to improve in the wake of taking over online specialist Naked Wines.

Diageo has meanwhile joined the ranks of big businesses backing a Remain vote. The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders, which represents the car industry, has reiterated its support for that outcome. It’s already hard enough to remember which businesses have come out in favour of EU membership and which haven’t. Keeping track of reiterations of support will be even tougher.

Sir Richard Branson is backing Remain too. He lives in the low-tax British Virgin Islands, according to the Virgin website. This gives his testimony a somewhat distant quality, particularly in relation to the strains immigration might impose on housing and public services.

