Federal Reserve pledges to provide dollar liquidity

2016-06-24

The Federal Reserve has pledged to provide dollars to other central banks if necessary to alleviate financial market turbulence that it said could ricochet and hit the US economy. 

In a statement issued hours after the UK voted to leave the EU, the Fed said it was ready to funnel dollars to other central banks via existing swap lines set up during the 2008 financial crisis. 

Its statement came after global markets were buffeted by the UK vote, which sent the pound spiralling downward and triggered a stock market sell-off. The move comes amid concerns among some market participants about the potential for shortages of dollar liquidity around the world, in particular Japan. 

“The Federal Reserve is prepared to provide dollar liquidity through its existing swap lines with central banks, as necessary, to address pressures in global funding markets, which could have adverse implications for the US economy,” the central bank said. It added that it was “carefully monitoring developments in global financial markets, in co-operation with other central banks”. 

In a separate statement, Jack Lew, the US Treasury secretary, said: “The UK and other policymakers have the tools necessary to support financial stability, which is key to economic growth.” The G7 noted in a statement that its central banks stood ready to use their “established liquidity instruments” if needed. 

Torsten Sløk, chief international economist at Deutsche Bank, said financial institutions were better prepared for big disruptions than they had been during the financial crisis, but that the implications of a political crisis were difficult to quantify. 

“In Japan some financial institutions may need US dollars — there are not enough dollars around,” he said. “The swap line is the Fed telling the Bank of Japan if you need dollars we will give you them anytime, so you don’t get disruptive moves, fire sales and other repercussions like those we saw in 2009.” 

Britain has prospered inside the EU but it will not do as well outside

The Fed viewed the possibility of a Brexit as a significant event that could deal a blow to the US economy because of the feedback via the financial markets. In the lead-up to the vote it examined US financial institutions to check what their exposures were, as well as factoring in the risk of an exit into its June meeting, when it decided to hold rates. 

Janet Yellen, the Fed chair, said after the Fed’s June meeting that a Brexit vote could have an impact on the outlook for Fed policy, in an indication that it would further reduce the odds of another upward rate move. Some market participants were on Friday asking whether the Fed could even be prompted to lower rates in the coming months if the turmoil following Brexit sent the dollar spiralling upward. 

After the UK vote, fed funds futures signalled no upward Fed move will come until 2018. 

Swap lines let foreign central banks borrow dollars from the Fed to provide to their own financial institutions, and were used heavily during the financial crisis. The European Central Bank and Bank of Japan also said they were ready to activate their own lines. 

