The golden generation leaves a tarnished legacy on Brexit

2016-06-24

Pulling up the drawbridge is a very English tradition. In fact, in its literal sense, it is so English that it is almost certainly — if my knowledge of Norman castle design serves — French. But, in one respect, the EU referendum result is more a figurative pulling up of the ladder by a certain privileged group.

This practice — of denying a leg up to those who follow — is often associated with the political elite. It is typically only after progressing from public school common room to the House of Commons, or from one kitchen in a £2m London mansion to another, that politicians become truly “progressive”, and make it more taxing for those hoping to follow in their footsteps. But in the politically divisive EU referendum, a very different constituency has been removing the rungs: pensioners. 

As the only age group to overwhelmingly support Brexit, over-65s seem to have been trying to deny anyone else the investment conditions they enjoyed after 1975, when Britain first joined Europe’s common market. And it is now to almost every saver’s detriment that they have succeeded.

Throughout the referendum campaign, pensioners have been the strongest supporters of a vote to leave the EU. In a YouGov poll on the eve of the vote, 61 per cent of over-65s said they would vote Leave. Friday’s results suggest they did just that in the polling booth.

Oddly, or perhaps nobly, pensioners’ chief motivation appears to be a concern that does not affect them directly. According to the Sky News Eurometer, 56 per cent of pension-age voters thought EU migrants were the main cause of UK unemployment (despite its decade low). However, their choice to leave the EU removes the four financial advantages they enjoyed for the best part of 41 years: generous employee pensions; rising share prices; real returns on cash deposits; and growing property equity. 

Employee pensions, and the employment rights that kept workers in them, have ensured “the current generation of pensioners is better off than ever before [with] incomes higher on average than the rest of the population”, says the Institute for Fiscal Studies. Leaving the EU, though, will take up to 17,000 under-65s out of work and pensions, based on International Monetary Fund projections, as well as probably delaying the higher interest rates and bond yields needed to improve annuities and cut pension deficits. On Friday morning, pension fund manager Hermes said the poll result would “intensify the pressure on pension schemes from ‘lower-for-even-longer’ bond yields”.

Share prices globally have risen on strong periods of economic growth and cross-border trade since 1975. Robert Arnott, founder of Research Affiliates, cites an “immense bull market from 1975 to 1999” that older investors rode. Even allowing for later market crashes, the FTSE All-Share has risen 21 fold in 41 years. But leaving the EU will, in the view of three-quarters of 1,750 chartered financial analysts, result in negative annual returns for UK equity portfolios. 

Cash deposits earned a sizeable real return — over and above inflation — for many of the years in which today’s pensioners were savers. In 1975, the Bank of England base rate stood at 10 per cent, and it averaged 10.9 per cent for the next 20 years — levels unheard of today. Compounding meant that cash savings even beat shares from 1995 onwards, according to BBC MoneyBox presenter and FT Money columnist Paul Lewis. Leaving the EU, though, is set to push inflation to 4.5 per cent on HSBC estimates, while providing no economic impetus for a rise in the base rate, or the average cash Isa rate, from 0.5 per cent. 

For savers and investors yet to reach retirement, the role of over-65s in delivering a Leave vote has kicked the investment ladder away

House prices, over the full 41-year period, outstripped almost all major asset classes, rising 18.5 times from £10,388 to £198,564, on Nationwide’s index. More significantly, Saga Investment Services has found that today’s pensioners paid off their mortgages at an average age of 55 — providing property equity and a seven-year period of mortgage-free income. Leaving the EU is forecast to cut prices by up to a quarter, on rating agency Fitch’s calculations, knocking £26.5bn off property values by 2018, says the Centre for Economics and Business Research.

Of course, some of these outcomes help the younger generation. A 25 per cent discount on house prices and lower-for-even-longer mortgage rates would put the property ladder back within reach.

But, for savers and investors yet to reach retirement, the role of over-65s in delivering a Leave vote has kicked the investment ladder away. On Friday morning, the FTSE All Share fell 4.8 per cent, UK government bond yields fell to a record low, interest rate futures signalled another 25 basis point cut and estate agents called an end to price rises.

With pensioners pulling up both the drawbridge and the ladder, future generations will find it hard to dodge the slings and arrows.

Matthew Vincent is the FT’s deputy companies editor matthew.vincent@ft.com 

