Tusk: Cameron to be excluded from summit day 2

2016-06-24

A sign of things to come.

Donald Tusk, president of the European Council, has told the bloc’s now 27 leaders they will conduct an “informal” round of talks on day two of an upcoming summit, excluding prime minister David Cameron as they discuss the fall out from Brexit.

Writing ahead of the June 28-29 summit, the former Polish prime minister said leaders would carry out talks over the UK’s divorce process in the absence of Mr Cameron.

On day one, although leaders would “mostly need to devote” their time to the fall-out from the referendum, it would only take up the dinner portion of the summit, said Mr Tusk.

For their appetizers, EU member states will be tackling the migrant crisis, reforms to the Single Market and security concerns with NATO’s secretary general, before their “first exchange of views” with Mr Cameron.

Here’s the letter in full courtesy of Alex Barker in Brussels (emphasis is ours):

Dear colleagues,

I have no doubt that due to the negative outcome of the UK referendum we will mostly need to devote our European Council to a discussion on its political consequences. It is my intention to ensure that we have sufficient space to debate both with Prime Minister Cameron, and then separately with the 27 Heads of State or Government.

At the same time, we will need to address the other planned issues on our agenda – tackling the migratory crisis, pushing ahead with the Single Market agenda to boost growth and jobs, and enhancing our security by working more closely with NATO. In fact, meeting these challenges is more important than ever.

Specifically, I intend to organise our proceedings next week in the following manner.

On Tuesday, after a traditional exchange of views with the President of the European Parliament, we will listen to brief presentations by the NATO Secretary General on EU/NATO cooperation, and by the EIB President on his initiative for the Southern Neighbourhood and the Western Balkans. Finally, I will propose that we adopt all of our conclusions, which should be possible given the good preparatory work conducted in the Council.

We will then move to dinner, where Prime Minister Cameron will explain the situation in the UK after the referendum, followed by a first exchange of views. This will mark the end of our meeting on Tuesday.

On Wednesday the 27 Heads of State or Government will meet informally to discuss the political and practical implications of ‘Brexit’. First of all, we will discuss the so called ‘divorce process’ as described in Art. 50 of the Treaty. And secondly, we will start a discussion on the future of the European Union with 27 Member States.

 Salutations

D. TUSK

