My fellow Americans, learn from Britain’s blunder

2016-06-24

In 1999 I moved to Britain as an economic migrant. The US academic market was already constricting so with some trepidation but high hopes I took an academic job at a British university — and, moreover, I took it away from a British person. But because I am middle class, have a PhD and am a native speaker of English, I am not called an economic migrant. I am an “expat”.

Expats do not get much grief: once or twice over the years I have been told to sod off back home to where I came from but that is as much anti-immigrant hostility as I have met. Yet I saw other economic migrants, who also often held advanced degrees but who spoke languages and came from countries viewed as more “foreign” than mine, encounter far greater difficulties.

For me, it was easy to integrate. I was warmly welcomed and 17 years later I have a fully British life, complete with a British husband who tries to teach me to pronounce “water” in the manner he views as correct (a battle he will continue to lose). So last month I decided, finally, to become a British citizen.

It was not an easy decision: I am American to my core. My nine-times great-grandmother, Mary Chilton, came over on the Mayflower (and always claimed to be the first of the ship’s passengers to set foot on Plymouth Rock).

Other ancestors were caught up in the American Revolution on both sides; Chilton’s great-grandson was one of the merchants whose tea was dumped in Boston harbour. By no coincidence, he remained loyal to the Crown (funny how money will do that).

But Britain has become my home — and I have been proud, even a little smug, to live in such a sane and reasonable place while my native land kept shooting itself (repeatedly, with legally purchased semi-automatic AR-15 rifles) in the head. Healthcare, gun regulation, the structures of the welfare state, open immigration: all the quandaries that America seemed unable to resolve, Britain treated with comparative aplomb. 

Trusting in its fundamental decency and civility, I became a citizen of Britain and was content to feel I had thereby become a citizen of the world. But today half of Britain has turned its back on that world. The UK may be disintegrating before our eyes, because a handful of Etonians decided to play Russian roulette with everyone’s futures, and because half the electorate is so angry, frustrated and disaffected that it just committed what might be the single largest collective act of cutting off one’s nose to spite one’s face in the history of humanity.

For some time Britain has seemed to me to be sleepwalking towards an Americanised future it does not truly want: populism, nativism, isolationism, culture wars, privatisation and the ideo­logy of individualism are replacing a common faith in the greater good. Now we can only hope that my fellow Americans will learn from watching what happens when an angry populism lets rip, and destroys everything except what it was aiming for.

For years the rest of the world has been watching America with alarmed dismay. Now, astonishingly, it is Britain’s turn.

The writer is chair of public understanding of the humanities at the School of Advanced Study, University of London  

