Do-or-die challenge for the bloc

2016-06-24

European leaders scrambled on Friday to shore up confidence in the EU and salvage a 60-year integration project that was already beset by crises and buckling under populist assault even before Britain voted to leave.

The departure of one of the largest EU countries puts decades of European statecraft into reverse and poses a do-or-die challenge for the bloc to overcome deep-set scepticism in nearly all 27 remaining members and restore the postwar integration project’s momentum and purpose. 

Rattled by a result few expected, many of the union’s leaders signalled the need for change. François Hollande, the French president, spoke of “immense dangers” from populism. Diplomats talked of a “process of reflection” to reset priorities, while a Franco-German plan is being worked up for deeper co-operation on borders, security and economic policy. 

To Donald Tusk, the European Council president, the task is to demonstrate that the EU is more than a “fair-weather” project. 

But it is far from clear that even a jolt such as Britain’s exit vote will be enough to resolve diverging views on the pace, depth and form of integration — particularly in the single currency. Instead, the reform initiative may lead to more clearly defined tracks for membership, rekindling federal goals for some of the EU’s founding members while allowing more resistant capitals to carve out a looser relationship with Brussels. 

“There will be no great leap forward,” said one senior EU official. Another said there was a “flinty view” in Berlin that “this is not the time” for grand federal schemes. 

Hollande’s room for manoeuvre in Europe will now be limited, writes François HeisbourgRead on

So while Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, declared it is “a turning point for Europe [and] the European unification process”, she added a caveat. “Europe is varied,” she said, including in its “expectations from the EU”. 

Resistance was most evident in the EU’s newer member states. Jaroslaw Kaczynski, the leader of Poland’s far-right ruling party, sniped at the mantra of “more Europe”, arguing that “federalist concepts lead to unhappiness” and urging “a new treaty” for the bloc. 

Senior officials familiar with talks between EU leaders say there is little appetite for Brussels’ normal response to crisis such as drawn-out discussions on a new treaty or ambitious plans for new institutions. The emphasis is on achieving some tangible results in select areas, and possibly pooling funds in areas such as defence or migration.

The aim of the reflection period would be in part to give politicians space to set out their vision for a reformed Europe — and to tackle the views of anti-establishment populists — during a period of ballot box tests throughout 2016 and 2017. 

As far as sharing power, money or risk, all of which have been on the table since the outbreak of the eurozone crisis, few in capitals think there is chance of serious advances until after these big electoral hurdles are cleared, most notably elections in France and Germany next year.

The damage beyond the UK may be manageable but political problems loom, writes Stephanie FlandersRead on

“In the short term it is all about the old European game of buying time,” said Matthieu Segers, a scholar on European integration at Utrecht University. “There are lame duck governments all over the place. We are nearing a terrible year in 2017; everything will stop and we will be defined by elections. We have a year of paralysis.”

There are new questions about whether investors will give them that breathing space. “The big unknown is whether markets start questioning the future of the EU and the eurozone,” said Laurence Boone, Axa’s chief economist and a former economic adviser to Mr Hollande. “We know well that the eurozone is not consolidated, it needs to be dealt with.” 

If markets turn against the eurozone, it is expected to be first through pressure on the Portuguese government and Italian banks. Ms Boone argues it makes it essential to complete the EU’s nascent banking union and guard against the “fragilities” in southern Europe. “The problem is that Germany is highly reluctant to agree to any fiscal transfers,” she says.

The situation could be far worse. On three crises — Greek debt, Russian aggression in Ukraine, and the migration crisis over the Aegean — Europe has found some hard-fought respite. 

Britain’s exit presents a chance for action with no objections from London, writes Daniela SchwarzerRead on

Yet, officials fear what progress has been made has only temporarily relieved pressures on the EU’s proud achievements, be it in the governance of the eurozone, the flow of capital around national markets and banks, democratic values, and the right to move freely between countries enjoyed by EU citizens.

An ambitious banking union was launched but lies incomplete. Tougher fiscal rules were passed in law but leniently applied in practice. Efforts to build an EU border force are in their infancy. EU tools to tackle the perceived illiberal turn in parts of eastern Europe are proving hard to apply. The politics of trade are becoming increasingly fraught; even when deals are agreed, they struggle to be ratified. 

For the euro area in particular the dilemmas are acute. “The next steps for the eurozone are issues that touch core matters of sovereignty, the basis of our democracy and the understanding of our nation state,” said Guntram Wolf, head of the Bruegel economic think-tank. “They are drifting and the core question is whether the French and Germans can see eye to eye.”

