Brexit divisions run deep in bellwether city

2016-06-22

Worcester is known as “the faithful city”, according to a sign outside the local museum that also cautions: “but its residents don’t always know where their loyalties lie”.

The Midlands city is a bellwether, ricocheting between Labour and Conservatives in recent general elections. In the 1990s, it gave birth to Worcester Woman, the emblematic voter who switched to Tony Blair’s Labour party.

It is also deeply divided on whether the UK’s future lies inside or outside the EU ahead of Thursday’s historic In/Out referendum. According to polling research, Worcester is one of the most divided areas in the country on the issue.

But as is the case with Britain as a whole the gulf between the two camps is a deep one. Passions run high on both sides; most people say weeks of campaigning have failed to shift them from their views. Few say they are undecided.

“It’s about 50:50, inevitably people who want to leave are slightly more vocal but the overall feeling seems to be split down the middle,” says Robin Walker, Tory MP for the city, who favours remaining in.

The split is largely along demographic lines. Older people on lower incomes and without a university education are more likely to vote to leave a bloc that is widely seen as costing too much money and constraining Britain’s ability to govern itself.

“Britain isn’t Britain any more; people are telling us what to do,” says June Gummery, a pensioner. “We want to take control.”

By contrast, more affluent people are more favourable — if not notably enthusiastic — about the EU project and its contribution to prosperity.

Jim McCummiskey, a chemicals executive, who has lived in Austria and Sweden, says: “It is to my mind better to be part of something big rather than stay outside and crap on about it.”

Worcester is described by Mr Walker, the local MP, as a “real microcosm of society”.

There is the prosperous city, with employers such as Bosch, Worcester University and Yamazaki Mazak, the Japanese manufacturer. Nearby is Warndon, with Labour-supporting council housing estates from the 1940s and 1950s. Then there are the Warndon villages, built in the 1990s, favoured by people who are upwardly mobile but still care about public services. Mr Walker describes such residents as “former Tories who voted for Blair in 1997 and we subsequently won back”.

Outside the vast Tesco supermarket in Warndon Villages the same message is repeated time and again. People want to exit the EU. While they may have supported David Cameron in the past, they have few reservations about voting Leave, even if the prime minister resigns as a result.

“Everyone I’m speaking to is Out. I think we should run our own country ourselves,” says Sarah Miller, a 47-year-old National Health Service worker who voted Conservative last year. Her husband has been advised by bosses at his manufacturing plant to vote In, but they are ignoring the plea.

On paper Phil Mieczynski would look like an In voter — he voted Green last summer, he used to work at Land Rover, his father was Polish — but he says: “I just don’t want to be ruled by a foreign power.”

————————-

UK’s EU Referendum: How people would vote

For a more detailed summary of opinion polling visit the FT’s Brexit poll tracker page

————————-

Back in the city centre landlord Ted Marshall has held a series of debates at the Cap and Gown pub featuring well-known politicians. He says there have been “passionate but amiable” debates to a full house.

Elsewhere, however, tensions have been running high: an argument at a local bookmakers nearly turned into a fist fight a few days ago.

Philip Jarrard, a sales executive, speaks for many when he says he is sick of “scaremongering” from the ruling classes. His “gut feeling” is that Britain would be better off out.

Vote Leave’s widely discredited figure for the cost of EU membership — which it puts at £350m a week — is hitting home: the number is mentioned countless times.

People living in the villages outside Worcester are particularly anxious about immigration — even though migrants are not highly visible in the area.

“Immigration here is horrendous, there’s nothing for the kids, it affects everyone, NHS, policing, schools,” says a female charity worker in Warnden. “You haven’t seen many foreigners here? You need to open your eyes.”

In the city’s cathedral is a memorial to the composer Sir Edward Elgar — who was born in a nearby village and wrote the music to the patriotic hymn “Land of Hope and Glory”. But alongside is another plaque that testifies to the city’s international links: dedicated to the memory of Robert Luddington, a 17th-century merchant famed for his overseas travels and mastery of languages.

Today many workers in the city have business ties with the rest of the EU and do not want to see the bloc fractured.

One pharmaceuticals manager argues that his business would suffer without eastern European migrants because they are the only people prepared to work bank holidays and night shifts.

Alan Jones, a tour guide who works on the continent, has misgivings about the EU but says: “We are better off trying to do something about it rather than being out.”

Residents, meanwhile, voice overwhelming scepticism about the two campaigns and their barrage of statistics.

On June 23 — referendum day — the cathedral is hosting a talk on “Faith in the Public Sphere”.

But in Worcester there is little faith in politicians: “The campaign has been absolutely terrible on both sides; it has been all about the fear factor,” says Mr Jones. “Nobody is putting the positive case.”

————————-

UK’s EU Referendum: Your top 10 Brexit questions answered

Financial Times reporters respond to trending Google queries about a British departure from the EU. Read more

————————-

