Weekend catchup — this week’s personal finance headlines

2016-06-17

Consumer price inflation in the UK held steady in May as rises in transport and hotel costs were offset by falls in the price of clothing and food, writes Emily Cadman.

At 0.3 per cent, the headline rate of inflation has risen from its record lows of last year, but is still well below the Bank of England’s 2 per cent target.

As economic growth has weakened, investors have pushed expectations of an interest rate rise further and further back, all the way into 2020.

Ian Stewart, chief economist at Deloitte, said “the era of ultra-low interest rates has much further to run”.

The supermarket price war, cheaper oil and subdued wage pressures have all helped hold down inflation for an extended period.

Most economists expect inflation to rise from the end of this year as earlier oil price falls drop out of the calculation and the impact of the weaker pound starts to feed through.

Read more on FT.com

Santander is breaking into the UK private banking market for the first time and will offer hundreds of investment funds to smaller savers, writes Emma Dunkley.

The bank said it will have 40 specialist managers across the country, in a drive to attract wealthier customers with at least £500,000 to invest.

The move is part of Santander’s strategy to expand its face-to-face advice service, three years after most of the UK’s largest banks retrenched in response to a string of fines and strict new rules.

Santander already has a strong private banking presence in other markets, such as Brazil, and is keen to target customers who do not have the £1m minimum required by some UK banks.

Read more on FT.com

RateSetter, one of the UK’s largest peer-to-peer lenders, is breaking into small business loans with the aid of government backing, writes Emma Dunkley.

The company, which has hired a specialist team, has built a technology platform to support business loans ahead of its launch into the market this week. It is the latest sign of peer-to-peer platforms moving into mainstream financial services.

RateSetter has already facilitated £1.3bn of lending to individuals and sole traders, but its move to business loans puts the company in direct competition with Funding Circle, a platform that focuses on lending to businesses. The government is providing support to RateSetter through the British Business Bank, which is channelling £10m to businesses through the company.

Read more on FT.com

Assets in the UK fund industry have fallen by nearly a fifth over the past 12 months, with senior executives and research analysts blaming heightened investor uncertainty ahead of Britain’s referendum on European Union membership, write Madison Marriage and Chris Newlands.

Next week’s vote has caused global market upheaval, pushing investors to safer assets and sending the UK currency and stocks to their lowest levels in months. 

According to Lipper, the research company, assets in the UK’s asset management industry have fallen by nearly £200bn to £900bn during the past year, as a result of the concern about a British exit from the EU.

Flows to UK funds have been negative for all but one of the past nine months, the figures showed. The expectation is that outflows will have accelerated in June as uncertainty over the outcome of the vote intensifies.

Read more on FT.com

Thousands of investors have been dealt a blow after the UK Supreme Court narrowly ruled in favour of Lloyds Banking Group’s controversial decision to call in more than £3bn of high income-paying bonds, writes Emma Dunkley.

The UK’s highest court ruled on Thursday by three votes to two that the bonds’ investment terms meant that Lloyds could redeem them early at face value. Investors were receiving as much as 16 per cent a year in interest.

The ruling is a blow to UK investors, many of whom were individuals, who believed the bonds, called “enhanced capital notes”, were worth more than par and that the terms did not allow for them to be called in.

Lloyds argued that the bonds no longer counted towards their capital reserves to meet regulatory requirements, therefore triggering a clause in the terms which the bank said allows for their redemption. Lloyds redeemed some £3.3bn of bonds earlier this year.

Read more on FT.com

All options will be on the table if Britain votes to leave the EU, the Bank of England said on Thursday, as it sought to reassure markets ahead of next Thursday’s referendum, writes Gemma Tetlow.

The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee voted unanimously to keep interest rates on hold, but has significantly increased its assessment of the risks posed to global financial markets, saying in its latest meeting that there could be “adverse spillovers to the global economy” and that a Brexit is “possibly” the biggest risk to global markets.

Until now, the MPC has said that risks from Brexit are overshadowed by worries about emerging markets.

This is a starker warning about the importance of next week’s vote than the Bank has previously given: until now it has felt that Brexit risk was overshadowed globally by risks from emerging markets.

Read more on FT.com

