Ken Clarke to end near 50-year career as MP

2016-06-19

Ken Clarke, the former Tory chancellor, is to step down as an MP at the next election, bringing down the curtain on a tumultuous Westminster career spanning half a century.

Mr Clarke, a pro-European who has become frustrated by the tone of Britain’s EU referendum debate, believes David Cameron made a big mistake by putting the issue to a public vote.

The 75-year-old MP for Rushcliffe in Nottinghamshire said in an interview with China Daily: “I will not stand again. This is my last parliament.”

Mr Clarke will have served 50 years as an MP if this parliament runs its full course until 2020 and has asked his local association to begin the process of picking a successor.

He is deeply worried about the EU referendum, saying that putting such a complex question to the electorate was “a very curious way of governing a modern and sophisticated country”.

Mr Clarke, renowned for his love of jazz, cricket, Hush Puppy shoes and straight-talking, urged Mr Cameron not to hold a referendum and warned that the short-term consequences of a Brexit vote would be “quite unpleasant”.

Although he hails from the pro-European left of the Tory party, Mr Clarke was picked by Margaret Thatcher to deliver tough public service reforms in health and education during the 1980s.

He was one of the few cabinet ministers to tell Thatcher to her face that she should quit during the leadership crisis of 1990. She called it “treachery, with a smile on its face”.

John Major made Mr Clarke his chancellor in the aftermath of the ERM debacle and during the mid-1990s the economy boomed, bequeathing a solid platform for Tony Blair’s subsequent Labour government.

After the Tories lost power to Mr Blair in 1997 Mr Clarke embarked on three separate attempts to claim his party’s crown but was unsuccessful on each occasion, his pro-European views increasingly out of fashion within the party.

When David Cameron became Tory leader in 2005 he turned to Mr Clarke as a wise head, including bringing him in as shadow business secretary to lend weight to an economic team led by the young George Osborne.

Mr Clarke served as justice secretary and minister without portfolio during Mr Cameron’s first term from 2010-15. He lists his favourite food as gammon, chips and mushy peas.

