Brexit: The Long View of a new Black Friday

2016-06-24

This column is called the Long View for a reason. It is incumbent on me to offer a long-term perspective on investing, markets, and the economy. And yet in the last few hours, the long-term outlook for the UK, the rest of the EU, and much of the rest of the world has changed, utterly.

The UK has voted to leave the EU. The long-term implications are profound. Many of the risks have already been widely discussed and debated. It means an initial period of acute uncertainty as the UK attempts to extricate itself from Europe. By setting a precedent, it emboldens the various nationalist movements throughout the EU, and sharply increases the chances that the eurozone itself will fracture.

It is a crushing defeat for the western world’s elites and establishments who are under pressure elsewhere — notably in the US. And the pattern of the voting in the UK suggests a painfully divided nation that is “united” only in name. Along the fissures of class, geography and generation, with Northern Ireland and Scotland both now at loggerheads with the rest of the UK, the country split into rival camps on a decision which was won by a small but clear margin. 

The opportunity is that the majority of Britons who have always chafed under Europe now have the chance to reassert their vision of an independent Britain. 

These are the long-term perspectives that we will now have months and years to explore. But we first need to survive the short term in order to reach the long term. 

Even before markets open in the UK and Europe (which we must learn to refer to separately), one immediate consequence is evident. Sterling has crashed. At $1.34, it is at its lowest against the dollar since the major economies agreed to weaken the dollar at the Plaza Accord in 1985. Its fall of 9.87 per cent (at the time of writing) is by far its greatest fall in one day since the currency was allowed to float. The previous record was 4.05 per cent on Black Wednesday in 1992.

Such a sudden and dramatic change in one of the world’s most heavily traded currencies can only have profound effects on the world financial system. Debts incurred by British entities in foreign currency will suddenly be far harder to repay. 

Sterling tumbles below $1.33 as Leave camp wins

So for now, let me just ask two questions. First, how did the markets get this so wrong, and make so strong a bet that the UK would vote to remain that it set up such a severe risk of an accident? 

And second, will world markets now undergo a “sudden stop” or convulsion of the kind they suffered during the crisis that followed the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy in 2008?

The efficiency of markets has had a bad press in recent years. But the hubris with which speculators loaded money on to their bet that the British would stay in Europe was spectacular. As the polls closed in the UK, the pound briefly topped $1.50 against the dollar — roughly the “fair value” suggested by purchasing power parities and its highest in a year. Had “Remain” triumphed, the pound had no room to move higher. Before a vote had been counted, a Remain victory was priced as a racing certainty.

The foreign exchange markets, in which some quadrillion dollars change hands each year, were only echoing the outcome of betting markets. Prediction markets brilliantly harness the wisdom of crowds. They have a tendency to do better than pollsters. And the Oddschecker.com compilation of odds on Thursday put the chances of Brexit at barely 10 per cent.

The hubris with which speculators loaded money on to their bet that the British would stay in Europe was spectacular

It appears that markets ran into what Nassim Taleb calls a “narrative fallacy”, believing a story that appealed, and then choosing to perceive only the facts that fit that story. Polls of polls in the last few weeks never showed a gap in favour of Remain of much more than one percentage point. 

But in the outpouring of grief that followed the appalling murder of the MP Jo Cox last week, many thought they could spy a turning point. Macro hedge funds, which have done terribly in the treacherous markets of recent years, in many cases commissioned their own woefully inadequate polls and stacked money on to their bet in favour of Remain. Polling was difficult enough anyway, and even harder when the only precedent was the UK’s previous EU referendum in 1975, but markets still wilfully set themselves up for a steeper fall. 

Part of the problem: markets are moved by a weight of money. If you have more money, you have more impact. In an election, every vote counts equally. And also, many asset managers had no clue what would decide the election. Believing in markets, they self-referentially took market confidence in a Remain vote as proof that it would happen. 

It appears that markets ran into what Nassim Taleb calls a “narrative fallacy”, believing a story that appealed, and then choosing to perceive only the facts that fit that story

This referendum was as embarrassing for betting and prediction markets as last year’s UK general election was for pollsters.

And what happens next? There will be pressure on banks, but at least increased regulation has forced them to carry a greater cushion of capital, and to be less risky. That risk may well have moved to the asset managers who placed such unwise bets on Remain. Will anyone fail, and will the liquidity still be available to let markets trade?

Brexit will probably mean a flow of funds to the dollar, which will put renewed pressure on emerging markets, some of which were showing some signs of life after approaching crisis last year. It also means intense problems for European stock markets, which had rallied recently. And it will be vital to monitor whether the pathology of the eurozone crisis, with the bonds of peripheral and core eurozone countries moving in opposite directions, recurs once more. There have been signs of it in recent weeks, and Brexit makes an exit from the eurozone seem politically far more possible. 

Economists agree that growth will be hit by decision to leave the EU

And the most immediate issue, which may well be resolved by the time you read this, is the action of central banks. They cannot take a move like this lying down. What can they do to make sure that markets keep functioning, and to safeguard order in foreign exchange?

We already have a “Black Friday” to dwarf sterling’s “Black Wednesday” in 1992, when Britain was forced to leave the EU’s exchange rate mechanism. That was humiliating, but created the conditions for a prolonged period of growth and prosperity.

The risk that this Friday will go down in history as altogether blacker is very real. The next move belongs to the central banks. Only when we have survived the short term, can we start to worry about the long term.

john.authers@ft.com

