Gold miners emerge through looking glass as havens from Brexit

2016-06-16

It is a cockeyed world when Petropavlovsk is deemed a haven from Brexit. It extracts gold from a part of Russia geographically so far to the right of Greenwich that it is left. But on Wednesday the Fed trimmed interest rate expectations, partly on nerves over the UK leaving the EU, the gold price hit a two-year high above $1,300 an ounce and gold miners’ shares spiked. 

Two years ago Pog, as the miner founded by goldbug Peter Hambro is known, all but collapsed under the weight of its debt. It was rescued by a rights issue last year. Now Mr Hambro is discussing with Russian partners how to expand production in return for equity stakes. This week Pog agreed to look at extending its reach into Kamchatka, where Siberian tigers roam in decreasing numbers.

Pog has been helped by the fact that its costs are in roubles. But its debt still exceeds the value of its equity. 

Investors looking for a haven might do better to look at debt-free Randgold, the sector’s biggest and lowest-cost producer operating a tad closer to home in Mali, Côte d’Ivoire and the Democratic Republic of Congo. 

Randgold is careful with its money and keen to squeeze more from its existing mines rather than splash out on new ones. 

The shares, trading at about 35 times forecast earnings, are twice as expensive as other London-listed miners. But the FTSE 100 group generates positive cash flow when the gold price is above $800 an ounce and in February it raised its dividend by a tenth. 

That said, miners of shiny yellow metal have a different perception of risk. Mark Bristow, Randgold’s swashbuckling chief executive, is currently on a motorbike ride crossing Africa. 

He left Mombasa in Kenya two weeks ago and is expected at the mouth of the Congo, on the other side of Africa, sometime soon. 

Steinhoff the fox

As Poundland boss Jim McCarthy slaps L-plates on to his motorbike and heads into the sunset, he might secretly want to hug Steinhoff. The South African retailer said this week it might bid for the UK discounter. Even if Steinhoff’s third tilt at buying a European store chain comes to nothing — as happened to its bids for Darty and Home Retail — it has stopped Poundland’s shares sliding to 100p and the chief executive’s swansong on Thursday sounding like a dirge. 

The market more or less expected the 14 per cent drop in full-year pre-tax profits on the core estate of Poundland stores and like-for-like sales to slip. But the dividend was also cut and pre-tax profits, including the 99p Stores bought last year, fell 84 per cent. 

Investors might not care so much now Steinhoff has been revealed as the mystery buyer of Poundland’s shares. The Black Country group’s enterprise value is not far off nine times expected earnings before interest and other negatives. The price to earnings ratio is touching 14 times. That is a hefty discount to peers. Fairly, though. It is tough making a turn when selling everything for a quid. In previous years Poundland, which started out as a Wolverhampton market stall, has cashed in on crazes for loom bands and selfie sticks. But USB plugs and Charlie Dimmock’s “In the garden” range do not quite cut it, particularly on high streets that teem with shops with interchangeable names such as Poundland, Poundstore, Bargain Buy or Home Bargain.

Mr McCarthy said on Thursday a discount retailer without scale is in trouble. He is probably right. But expansion comes at a heavy price.

Steinhoff might look like a fox let loose in a chicken coop, snapping at anything that tickles its nose. But it walked away from Darty and Home Retail when the fare looked too rich. It will do so again.

Bookies robbed by wins

Thursday was the biggest day in the bookies’ year. Ladies Day and the Gold Cup at Ascot is always the season’s high point, with penguin-suited racegoers betting £30m or so on the nags. This year was special, though. Andy Murray played at Queen’s Club tennis championships, and England played Wales in Euro 2016. Gambling groups reckon punters with patriotic leanings will have been out in force and some 5m people will have bet up to £80m on the day’s sporting events. 

The shame for the bookmakers is that England, Murray and Order of St George, the Gold Cup favourite, all won. That will have inflicted a similar degree of pain on bookies that the Cheltenham festival did in March, when unusually high numbers of short-odds favourites romped home. William Hill and Ladbrokes — already struggling with tighter taxation and regulation, and under pressure to shift from the high street to the web — complain Cheltenham was the worst in 30 years. 

Still, what bookies lose in a day, they make back during the rest of the year. And it encourages punters if they see that the bank doesn’t always win. As industry veterans say: “You gotta let the dogs see the bunny”.

kate.burgess@ft.com

