Asian markets under pressure, BoJ stands pat

2016-06-16

The Japanese yen rose to its highest level in almost 22 months and government bond yields fell to record lows after the Bank of Japan refrained from easing monetary policy.

That follows a rather dovish policy statement from the Federal Reserve overnight as it kept interest rates on hold as expected, a move that saw the dollar weaken and investors again chase after government bonds.

The yen jumped as much as 1.4 per cent to ¥104.53 per dollar, its strongest level since September 2 2014, after the BoJ kept deposit rates steady at minus 0.1 per cent and the annual pace of its asset-purchase programme unchanged at ¥80tn.

The central bank acknowledged inflation expectations have recently weakened, but said Japan’s economy “is likely to be on a moderate expanding trend.”

At its April meeting, the BoJ downgraded its inflation forecasts and pushed back the timing of when it expects to achieve its 2 per cent inflation target. For many economists, it is not a matter of if the BoJ eases policy again but when, and ahead of today’s meeting, many thought July was a greater possibility for action.

Japan’s broad Topix index was down 1.2 per cent and the Nikkei 225 was down 1.1 per cent as investors took a break for lunch. Yields on benchmark Japanese government bonds from five years out to 30-year had already traded to record lows during the morning session and ahead of the BoJ decision.

The dollar index, a measure of the US currency versus a basket of global peers, sank as much as 0.3 per cent to 94.327 in Asia. The greenback shed one-third of one per cent on Wednesday as the Fed kept interest rates on hold and issued a relatively dovish policy statement in which it acknowledged the slowing pace of improvement in the US labour market and international risks to growth, such as the UK’s impending referendum on June 23 about European Union membership.

Gold, which is sensitive to US interest rate expectations, was up 0.5 per cent in Asia today at $1,298.31 an ounce, and had risen above $1,300 for the firs time since May 2.

Hong Kong’s Hang Seng was down 1.8 per cent, while on the mainland, the Shanghai Composite was down 0.2 per cent and technology-focused Shenzhen Composite gained 0.2 per cent.

Australia’s S&P/ASX 200 was up 0.2 per cent, but the action Down Under was in the bond and currency markets.

The Australian economy added 17,900 jobs in May, which was more than expected, and the unemployment rate remained steady at 5.7 per cent. However, all those jobs were part-time, prompting economists to question the overall quality of those gains.

The Australian dollar had a brief spike higher, but has now settled in to be 0.1 per cent lower at $0.7398 and the worst-performing Asian currency today.

Also notable, the yield on the Australian government 10-year bond (which moves inversely to price) fell below 2 per cent for the first time ever, to a record low 1.998 per cent.

That comes amid a broad global grab for the relative safety of government debt. German, US and Japanese bonds have benefited from that demand, in turn pushing yields on 10-year German and Japan bonds to record lows in recent sessions, while treasuries are hovering close to a February nadir.

The yield on the UK 10-year gilt has hit record lows as nerves around Brexit grow. Should voters decide to leave the EU, it is likely the Bank of England will delay raising interest rates, which would in turn put downward pressure on UK bond yields.

The British pound was down 0.2 per cent at $1.4183 ahead of the Bank of England’s policy meeting later today.

Oil prices remained under pressure, with Brent crude, the international benchmark, down 0.7 per cent at $48.64 a barrel and West Texas Intermediate, the US marker, down 0.9 per cent at $47.57.

