European Central Bank prepares for Brexit contingencies

2016-06-21

The European Central Bank is preparing for “all possible contingencies” in the event of a UK vote to leave EU, Mario Draghi has said, adding it was “very difficult” to predict the impact of Brexit on the single currency area. 

Decision clears legal hurdle to deployment of Outright Monetary Transactions programme

The ECB president said at a hearing of the European Parliament in Brussels that the central bank had “done all the preparation we can” in case the UK votes on Thursday to quit the EU. 

“It’s very difficult to foresee the various dimensions how [Brexit] will impact on the markets and the economies of the eurozone,” Mr Draghi said. “We are trying to be ready to cope with all possible contingencies. At this point it will be difficult to be more precise than that.”

The ECB has a euro swap line set up with major central banks around the world, including the Bank of England, which it can use to pump euros into the global financial system across borders and time zones. Banks within the single currency area can access unlimited amounts of euro liquidity, as long as they have collateral to hold against loans from the ECB. 

While Mr Draghi sounded confident that the eurozone’s economy would continue to strengthen after a good start to 2016, he cautioned that threats to growth remained due to “geopolitical developments”. The ECB would use all its available instruments if necessary to counter the side effects of a Brexit, he said. 

If a Brexit threatens to derail the eurozone’s recovery, then the ECB could expand its quantitative easing programme, under which it is now buying €80bn worth of mostly government bonds each month. Officials could also unleash their Outright Monetary Transactions programme, under which the ECB can buy short-term government debt in potentially unlimited quantities, to counter an extreme reaction in financial markets. 

Mr Draghi said the decision by the German Constitutional Court in Karlsruhe earlier on Tuesday that the OMT was legal “confirms the ruling of the Court of Justice of the European Union”. The EU’s highest court said last year that the OMT was within the ECB’s mandate. 

The ECB president also said a stronger, more widespread revival in investment needed to drive a recovery that up until now has been largely down to stronger spending by consumers. 

“Uncertainty has to be reduced for investment to pick up at a robust pace,” Mr Draghi said. There was also a “very strong” case for more public investment from governments that had the space in their budgets to spend. 

