David Cameron’s reign as PM ends with crushing disappointment

2016-06-24

David Cameron’s resignation as UK prime minister after his six years in Downing Street ended with the crushing disappointment of seeing his country vote to leave the EU amid market chaos.

Mr Cameron, his voice cracking with emotion, said he would stay on as premier for a few months to try to “steady the ship” but that he expected his successor to be in place by October.

Reluctantly forced into the vote, the PM’s worst fears came true

Speaking outside 10 Downing Street, he said: “I don’t think it would be right for me to be the captain to steer the country to its next destination.”

The prime minister said the country “requires fresh leadership”; the frontrunner to succeed him is Boris Johnson, the former London mayor, who led the Vote Leave campaign.

Mr Cameron said he would explain to fellow EU leaders at a summit in Brussels next week the implications of the Brexit vote, but would refrain from activating Article 50 of the Lisbon treaty, which formally begins exit talks.

He said his successor should decide how to take forward the negotiations, including the timetable for an eventual departure.

Mr Cameron was urged by fellow ministers and pro-Brexit Tories to delay his departure to deploy his expertise and knowledge of European diplomacy to secure a good Brexit deal.

But the prime minister has found himself having to implement a Brexit that he had previously warned would be a disaster for the country, while Eurosceptic Tory ministers call the shots. 

Earlier, Philip Hammond, foreign secretary, urged Mr Cameron to stay on as prime minister “to carry out the instructions of the British people” to leave the EU.

Some 86 pro-Brexit Tory MPs had also signed a letter pleading with Mr Cameron to stay on, but in the end he decided that he had no choice but to quit after such a humiliating defeat.

The plea to Mr Cameron to continue was echoed by the victorious Brexit camp, which was striking a decidedly cautious note on Friday about how it wants Britain to proceed towards the exit door.

Liam Fox, the former defence secretary, urged Mr Cameron to provide stability “at least until we are well into the process” of negotiating an exit from the EU. He said Britain wanted to leave “on good terms”.

Chris Grayling, the pro-Brexit Leader of the House of Commons, told the FT before the referendum vote that he envisaged a slow process of unravelling the EU relationship completing a final exit in late 2019. 

