Japan stocks 8% lower amid Kuroda comments

2016-06-24

As the Tokyo afternoon session entered its final hour with stocks in the Topix index almost 8 per cent down on the day and talk of currency intervention still very much in the air, one veteran equity trader at a large Japanese house described “the same sense of complete, confused wipe-out that we had after the [2011] Tohoku earthquake”.

On Japanese government bond (JGB) markets, yields on the benchmark 10-year note fell slightly to minus 0.205% – still above the record low hit last week, writes Leo Lewis in Tokyo.

The Topix was off by 7.7 per cent while the Nikkei 225 was down 8.1 per cent.

Traders said that liquidity in the note had been very low as nobody was keen to trade until Bunds and UK Gilts are moving. Foreigners were the second most active in the 10-year JGB market, after the Bank of Japan. Japanese investors, seeking safety in troubled times, continued to buy the 30-year JGB.

Spoken comments from the Finance Minister, Taro Aso, and emailed comments from the governor of the Bank of Japan, Haruhiko Kuroda seem to have temporarily stabilised the yen against the dollar, euro and pound but currency traders said that the market is still a very long way from seeing any form of stability – particularly as the yen joins gold, the Swiss franc and other assets as the supposed safe haven in the wake of the Brexit result.Mr Kuroda’s comments that the BoJ was “closely watching the impact of the results on markets” and that it was in close contact with authorities elsewhere in the world came as the yen broke through the ¥‎100 mark for the first time since 2013.

Shusuke Yamada, head Japan FX strategist at Bank of America Merrill Lynch said that the huge swings in the yen cross rates had been driven by thin volumes and warned that attempts by the authorities to try to calm the markets would take some time to have any clear effect. For the moment, he said, it looks as though the Japanese authorities have not intervened to weaken the yen, but agreed that it was difficult to be sure.

Global uncertainty, said Mr Yamada, is a support for the yen, and at the moment it is very difficult for global currency markets to find the appropriate level following the referendum result.

