Britain turns its back on Europe

2016-06-24

Britain swept away 50 years of foreign policy, turning its back on the EU, in a moment of extraordinary political upheaval that deposed its prime minister, sank its currency and reopened the possibility of Scottish independence.

After a lengthy and bad-tempered referendum campaign, Britons voted by 51.9 per cent to sever the country’s 43-year membership of the EU, sending tremors across Europe and triggering financial market turmoil across the globe.

Markets were caught completely off-guard as the first results landed. In a frantic day of trading, the pound dived to a 30-year low, setting a record intraday swing of more than 10 per cent between its high and low points; the FTSE 100 slumped 8.7 per cent on opening before trimming losses to 4.3 per cent. Bank stocks took a hammering, with Lloyds down 22 per cent, Royal Bank of Scotland down 18 per cent and Deutsche Bank falling 17 per cent.

The Euro Stoxx bank index fell 17 per cent, back to levels last seen at the depths of the eurozone debt crisis in August 2012.

US stocks finished a bruising trading session with the benchmark S&P 500 sliding 3.6 per cent to 2,037, the steepest one-day decline since last August. The US dollar posted one of its biggest rallies on record, and gold prices shot higher. The yield on the 10-year US Treasury dropped 18bps to 1.57 per cent. 

An emotional Mr Cameron said he would remain in office for the next few months to “steady the ship” while the Conservative party chose a new leader but that Britain needed “fresh leadership” to take it in the new direction chosen by voters.

The vote dismayed Britain’s allies and pitched the country into a period of deep political and economic uncertainty. It also poses an existential challenge to the EU after nearly six decades of integration. “It’s an explosive shock. At stake is the break up pure and simple of the union,” Manuel Valls, the French prime minister, said. Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany called it a “turning point for Europe”.

The ramifications of the decision were laid bare when Nicola Sturgeon, first minister of Scotland, which voted to stay in the EU, said a second vote on independence was “highly likely” two years after the last plebiscite.

London also ran into immediate resistance from the rest of the bloc, where there is growing impatience with the British. EU leaders, who will meet without Mr Cameron on Wednesday, said there would be no renegotiation of Britain’s membership terms and demanded that the UK swiftly engage in exit talks and invoke article 50 of the EU treaties, which sets a two-year deadline. EU officials said their warning was not aimed at Mr Cameron but at his successor, who is expected to take over by October.

George Osborne, chancellor, is expected to stay in his job until the autumn to help stabilise the economic situation. His allies said that “cabinet will continue” and that they did not expect him to move from the Treasury in the near future.

Mr Cameron had gambled his political future on the referendum but his hopes of securing a Remain vote evaporated as voters in Labour heartlands turned out in huge numbers to deliver a stunning rebuke to the establishment and the status quo.

The result revealed deep divisions across Britain, with prosperous London and Scotland voting by large margins to stay in, and working-class towns, seaside resorts and rural England heavily backing Leave.

Latest updates on the political and market fallout

The Brexit vote stunned the political establishment. Even though the outcome was expected to be close, the final opinion polls had pointed to a narrow victory for remain. Nigel Farage, the UK Independence party leader, who did more than anyone to bring the referendum about, had all but conceded defeat just after polls close.

But as the first results came in from the north-east of England, it soon became clear that Leave voters had turned out in greater numbers. The vote reflected a roar of rage from those who felt alienated from London and left behind by globalisation.

“I do think that yesterday’s vote speaks to the ongoing changes and challenges that are raised by globalisation,” US President Barack Obama said. “But while the UK’s relationship with the EU will change, one thing that will not change is the special relationship that exists between our two nations.”

Boris Johnson, who spearheaded the Leave campaign and is now favourite to take over as prime minister, paid tribute to Mr Cameron as a “brave and principled man” but insisted holding the referendum was “right and inevitable”.

Looking subdued and lacking his usual ebullience, he said: “The EU was a noble idea for its time. It is no longer right for this country.”

Even though European leaders were pressing for a speedy start to exit talks, Mr Johnson said there was “no need for haste” and indicated he would wait until Mr Cameron’s successor is in office before triggering the formal process.

What the vote means for trade, immigration and growth has yet to be determined

Mark Carney, governor of the Bank of England, said it “will not hesitate to take additional measures as required as markets adjust”, insisting that the BoE was “well prepared” for volatility after extensive contingency planning and that the financial system was more resilient than at the time of the financial crisis.

The US Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank said they were standing by to inject extra liquidity. 

Central bankers will discuss the turmoil in Basel over the weekend at a pre-scheduled meeting at the Bank of International Settlements.

The market mayhem revived concerns about stresses in the eurozone’s periphery. Southern markets suffered their worst trading day in history. Spain’s Ibex index tumbled 12.35 per cent, its largest decline since launching in 1992. The main Milan index fell 12.5 per cent while Italy’s 10-year debt spiked by 30bp to 1.53 per cent. 

The vote to leave could have immediate consequences for UK businesses beyond the City of London. Shares in airlines, travel companies and media groups were particularly hard hit.

What was your initial feeling after you heard the results? What questions do you have now? Share your thoughts with the FT community here.

An early casualty could be London Stock Exchange group’s planned $20bn merger with Deutsche Börse. Executives on both sides of the deal voiced fears the vote would put pressure on German watchdogs to block the tie-up because the merged entity would be based in London. 

It could damage the chances of Tata Steel, Britain’s biggest steel producer, maintaining its operations in the UK, according to a person close to the company.

In addition, Moody’s Investors Service has said that it may cut the UK’s credit rating, reducing its outlook to “negative” from “stable” and saying that the vote to exit the EU may herald a “prolonged period of uncertainty”“.

“During the several years in which the UK will have to renegotiate its trade relations with the EU, Moody’s expects heightened uncertainty, diminished confidence and lower spending and investment to result in weaker growth,” the rating agency said. Moody’s rates the UK at Aa1, having stripped it of its top-notch Aaa rating in 2013.

 Europeans leaders will spend the weekend calibrating their response to what is the biggest setback in the EU’s history. The French, German and Italian leaders will meet on Monday to reaffirm their commitment to integration and to shore up confidence in the eurozone. But one senior official said there were no plans for a “great leap forward”. 

Barack Obama and Angela Merkel spoke on the phone over Brexit. Both the US president and the German chancellor said they regretted the decision but respected the will of the British people.

Eurosceptic parties were quick to draw inspiration from Britain. “I think that the UK has initiated a movement that will not stop,” said Marine Le Pen, France’s far-right leader. 

The Eurosceptic PVV party in the Netherlands also called for a referendum. “Great Britain has shown Europe the road to the future and liberation,” it said.

President Vladimir Putin of Russia ascribed the Brexit vote to “arrogance and a superficial approach from the British leadership”. 

Speaking in Scotland, Donald Trump, the Republican presidential candidate, praised the judgment of the British people. “They took their country back . . . people around the world are angry.” 

Mr Obama, who warned the UK during the referendum campaign, that it would be at the back of the queue for any trade deal with the US post-Brexit, said Britain would remain an “indispensable partner”. John Kirby, spokesman for the US State Department, said the administration was “evaluating” the impact of the Brexit vote on its approach to trade talks.

Chin up, Cornwall — after all, you voted to be poorer / From John Lock

