How a cautious nation came to tear down the political temple

2016-06-24

Financial capitalism survived the 2008 global crash. Liberal democracy has not fared so well. There is a connection. 

Political elites are under pressure everywhere in the west. Donald Trump is a candidate for US president. Marine Le Pen is bidding for France’s Élysée Palace. But who would have thought pragmatic, moderate, incrementalist Britain would tear down the political temple? This week’s referendum result was a revolt against the status quo with consequences, national and international, as profound as anything seen in postwar Europe.

You can cite perhaps half-a-dozen explanations as to why the once-phlegmatic British voted against their own economic interests by quitting the EU. British exceptionalism, migration, a scandalously duplicitous Leave campaign, stagnant incomes and post-crash austerity are all on the list. But the thread through it all was deep disgruntlement with a political and economic system that is seen as rigged against the hard-working classes.

It was always clear that the referendum would fracture the Conservative party. But it was won by the “outs” only because millions of erstwhile Labour supporters deserted their own leftist leadership for the anti-immigrant xenophobia peddled by the United Kingdom Independence party. For decades politics was a game of turn and turnabout among the long established parties of centre-right and centre-left. Now, Conservatives and Labour in Britain, and Christian and Social Democrats on the European continent have lost control. 

Brexit will leave Britain poorer at home and diminished on the international stage. It marks a retreat from the world. The leaving of one union could lead to the break-up of another if Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, presses ahead with her plan for another independence referendum. A flight of foreign capital and businesses from the UK may tip the economy into recession. 

The leavers, led by the flamboyantly evasive Boris Johnson, have no plans to cope with any of this. Mr Johnson has not thought beyond an all-consuming ambition to replace David Cameron as prime minister. He has failed to offer a serious prospectus for the simple reason that, beyond some nostalgic nonsense about reconquering the world, he has no idea about what comes next. For what it is worth, the harsh truth is that the British government will spend the next five to 10 years in the costly business of disentangling its affairs from Brussels. 

Since 2008 the unfairnesses have been amplified by austerity: the wealthiest one per cent have been barely touched

Friends and allies will have little sympathy. After surviving the twin crises centred on the euro and migration, Germany’s Angela Merkel and France’s François Hollande will not thank Britain for adding a third. Perfidious Albion has always been an awkward partner, but the Union will be weaker for the departure of such an important state. 

Nor can Mr Cameron’s successor look to Washington for comfort. US President Barack Obama could not have been more candid that a leave vote would represent self-demotion in the contest for influence in the US capital. The “special relationship” is a description loaded more with symbolism than substance. Brexit will strip it of both. All this as the west is challenged by a revanchist Russia, by chaos and terrorism in the Middle East and uncontrolled migration.

Irritated as they are with Britain, these other leaders would do well to study carefully the forces at work in the referendum campaign. If a nation as innately cautious as Britain can tear up in the course of a single day foreign and economic policies that have been crafted over half a century, who can dare rule out an electoral earthquake propelling Mr Trump into the White House or Ms Le Pen into the Élysée?

Britain has prospered inside the EU but it will not do as well outside

What Americans call the “takeaway” from the referendum can be summarised in one short phrase: globalisation is not working. Big business has become bad political news. Yes, of course one can produce endless statistics showing how open global markets are a stimulus to growth and prosperity. But as true as they are, these are abstract, aggregate figures. They do not reflect the experience of the majority.

For a decade or so the badly skewed distribution of the gains from globalisation and widespread tax-evasion on the part of big business were camouflaged by buoyant economic growth. Since 2008 the unfairnesses have been amplified by austerity: the wealthiest one per cent have been barely touched.

Capitalism needed saving, but in bailing out the financial institutions with taxpayers’ money, governments transferred the stresses from markets to politics. A return to economic growth would relieve some of the pressure. Europe in particular must understand just how politically corrosive slavish devotion to fiscal targets has become. But the politicians also must confront the excesses. If they want to save liberal democracy, they will have to reform capitalism. 

philip.stephens@ft.com

