Optimism returns to tentative markets on Brexit day

2016-06-23

Sterling hit its highest point of the year and equity gauges are firmer as voting gets underway in the UK’s referendum on whether to stay in the EU.

Markets have been rattled in recent months on fears that already fragile global growth would be damaged by any economic and political rupture that a “Brexit” might cause, writes Jamie Chisholm. 

So, Thursday’s tentatively “risk on” tone — which also sees reduced demand for government bonds — suggests more investors, despite some mixed polls, are betting that Britons will decide to “Remain”.

After Tokyo led Asian equities higher with a 1.2 per cent advance, the pan-European Stoxx 600 index is opening up 0.4 per cent and US index futures suggest the S&P 500 will gain 9 points to 2,094.

UK growth-focused assets are upbeat. London’s FTSE 100 index is advancing 0.8 per cent to challenge a two month high as financial and energy stocks gain ground.

The pound is the lead vehicle for expressing trader sentiment on the referendum and is up 0.3 per cent to $1.4752, earlier hitting $1.4842, its strongest since the start of January.

The bounce in sterling over recent days, alongside opinion poll readings, “suggests an asymmetric risk to the outcome once again, with a Leave decision more damaging for sterling and risk sentiment than a decision to Remain is positive,” said Kit Juckes at Société Générale.

“For all that, though, the direction of travel remains straightforward. We expect to see GBP/USD trade above $1.50 on a decision to stay, but would be surprised to see it at $1.55. We still expect to see the other side of GBP/USD $1.35 quite soon after a decision to leave,” he added.

UK 10-year government bond yields, which move inversely to the price, are up 1 basis point to 1.32 per cent.

The benchmark yield fell to a record low of 1.07 per cent last week when investors thought a Brexit vote could hit the UK economy and cause the Bank of England to ease monetary policy further.

Equivalent maturity German Bunds, which entered negative territory this month after traders anticipated a “flight to safety” should the UK leave the EU, are steady at 0.06 per cent.

The euro is advancing 0.4 per cent to $1.1337. The dollar index is down 0.3 per cent to 93.47 and US Treasuries are adding 1bp to 1.70 per cent after Fed chair Janet Yellen’s testimony in Washington this week did little to alter expectations for when the central bank will raise interest rates.

In commodities, the softer dollar is supporting prices. Brent crude, the international energy benchmark, is up 0.3 per cent at $50.07 a barrel, while base metals are mostly firmer. Gold is up $2 to $1,268 an ounce.

And yet, despite the relatively positive sentiment among traders, markets remain wary. Many exchanges have increased initial margin — or deposits — speculators must hold in case of extreme volatility.

The cost of hedging against sharp moves in the sterling/dollar exchange rate over the next week is up 12 per cent to 47.14, just shy of a record high.The CBOE Vix index. which measures expected volatility for Wall Street’s S&P 500, sits at a four-month high of 21.17.

