Dealmakers warn of chaos in completing UK tie-ups

2016-06-24

Dealmakers in London warned of chaos for those trying to complete UK acquisitions but possible bargains for overseas buyers, as they assessed the implications of the country’s vote to leave the EU.

Many cautioned that the consequences of what Richard Cranfield, a partner at Allen & Overy, called the “biggest demerger in history” would take months to play out in corporate merger and acquisitions markets.

However, the London Stock Exchange’s proposed $30bn merger with Deutsche Börse — yet to be approved by their shareholders — quickly emerged as one of the biggest potential casualties being watched by traders.

The boards of LSE and Deutsche Börse on Friday said they remained “fully committed to the agreed and binding merger terms” and that “the outcome of the referendum does not impact the compelling strategic rationale of the merger”.

But people close to the transaction said the deal in its current form could now be difficult to complete, especially given plans to base the merged group’s holding company in London.

Mark Kelly, chief executive of Olivetree, a broker and consultant, said markets were worried that headquartering the combined exchange outside the EU in post-Brexit London would be a “deeply unpalatable concept” for German regulators.

Mr Kelly added that markets were already concerned over the billing of the LSE-Deutsche Börse deal as a merger of equals. “History is littered with mergers of equals that failed to get done,” he noted.

South African conglomerate Steinhoff also said it was reviewing its proposed takeover of Poundland, following resistance from Poundland’s board and the referendum vote to leave the EU.

Steinhoff has amassed a 23 per cent stake in the UK discount retailer, and last week said it was considering a full takeover after speculation fuelled a jump in the UK retailer’s share price.

But, in a statement on Friday, Steinhoff said “the board of Poundland has not accepted our proposal regarding a possible cash offer”. Steinhoff added that it was “considering its position” on the deal.

It cited Poundland’s weak full-year results, the “recent movement in the share price” and “the impact of the EU referendum on global markets”.

Volume of deals with British groups down 70% this year compared to same period in 2015

By contrast, the Belgian-Brazilian brewer Anheuser-Busch InBev’s £71bn offer for the UK’s SABMiller, one of biggest M&A deals in corporate history, looks reasonably safe, according to analysts.

With this deal, the main Brexit risk would be if SABMiller’s shareholders and board were to decide that ABInBev’s £44 cash offer undervalued the business, given the post Brexit collapse of sterling against the US dollar. SABMiller reports its earnings in dollars.

Fortunately, SAB’s two largest shareholders — Altria of the US and BevCo, the private investment vehicle of Colombia’s Santo Domingo family — have already committed to the partial share alternative, which on Friday was worth £46 a share.

For other shareholders, the certainty of a £44 cash payment could look attractive in volatile markets.

SABMiller declined to comment. AB InBev said: “We prefer not to comment or speculate on potential hypothetical impacts of Britain’s decision to leave the European Union.”

With sterling falling by as much as 10 per cent against the US dollar on Friday, a weaker pound could now entice US and other foreign corporate buyers to pursue London-listed targets.

“Any sustained fall in the pound may expose some UK-listed multinational companies to opportunistic takeovers from overseas buyers,” said Mr Cranfield at Allen & Overy.

Litany of regulatory and cultural hurdles must be cleared for brewer’s dream to be realised

Meanwhile, in the private equity industry, executives arrived at their desks on Friday as bewildered as other finance professionals that the UK, Europe’s largest buyout market, had voted to leave.

Many of the continent’s biggest private equity managers are based in London’s Mayfair and West End — although their biggest funds tend to be denominated in euros versus sterling.

“It will take years to unravel the full ramifications of the vote,” said Simon Witney, a lawyer at King Wood & Mallesons. 

“Market uncertainty will now make the UK a very challenging environment for investors,” he added, “although no doubt there will be opportunities — especially for non-sterling denominated funds”.

Until now, private equity firms have been major beneficiaries of EU “ passporting” rules allowing them to operate in other European countries under UK regulations. As a result, they will now need to check the legal terms of Brexit closely for their effects on raising funds worldwide.

Mr Witney added that “a period of intense activity must now begin, so that the voice of private equity is heard, alongside the financial services industry, to first formulate and then express its views on what it wants from the ensuing negotiations”.

David Bailey, a director at Augentius, the private equity fund administrator, said that while firms may “need to create slightly more complex structures to accommodate the new relationship . . . UK funds and their underlying investments will remain an attractive destination for European money”.

Additional reporting by Paul McClean

