Dollar retreats as Brexit fears take a pause

2016-06-20

The dollar proved a casualty on Monday as signs of a swing back to the Remain camp ahead of the UK’s historic vote on EU membership fanned investors’ appetite for risk.

The dollar index, which tracks the US currency against six of its big rivals, fell 0.7 per cent to 93.58. Its broad decline catapulted the euro up 0.6 per cent to $1.1340, its highest level in six sessions. 

Like sterling, Europe’s single currency has been under pressure from fears that a British exit from the EU could be the start of an unravelling for an economic union born out of the second world war.

The shared currency was last at such levels before the bout of nervous trading that dominated much of last week. A broad rebound in risk also sent the Australian dollar up 1 per cent to $0.7472, also a six-session high. 

In tandem with the improving mood, haven currencies retreated from the notable highs reached last week. Japan’s yen stood out, weakening by 0.3 per cent to Y104.43 against the dollar.

Analysts are expecting trade to be volatile in the run-up to the outcome of the referendum, which is expected in the early hours of Friday morning. 

Kit Juckes, a strategist at Société Générale, said: “The market will surely gyrate some more in the next few days as any shift in the polls triggers an exaggerated reaction, not just for sterling but for wider risk sentiment.”

Elsewhere, India’s rupee was able to bounce from session lows even after the departure of the widely respected governor of the Reserve Bank of India, Raghuram Rajan, who was credited with restoring the country’s macroeconomic stability. The currency closed down 0.4 per cent at Rs67.31 per US dollar after earlier falling as much as 0.9 per cent. 

Norway’s krone rose 1.2 per cent against the dollar, with Nkr8.2500 required for a unit of the world’s reserve currency ahead of its central bank’s policy meeting on Thursday. Against the euro, the krone strengthened by 0.8 per cent to Nkr9.3481 per euro. 

Analysis from BNY Mellon warned that in the context of $50-a-barrel oil prices, “currency competitiveness will remain central to Norway’s growth strategy in the interim . . . this is one meeting that is certainly ‘live’.”

Neil Mellor, senior currency strategist, added: “In view of the fact that almost all of Norway’s exports go to the eurozone at a time when the latter’s growth expectations remain modest at best, we believe that the best contribution that the Norges Bank can make . . . is to ensure that the krone is not unduly uncompetitive among its rivals.”

