Asset managers reel after Brexit vote

2016-06-24

Asset managers bore the brunt of fears that the UK’s historic vote to leave the EU would hit economic growth, dampen consumer confidence and weaken sterling. 

Shares fell particularly sharply in London-listed groups despite industry efforts to reassure investors that they would be would be able to continue to compete overseas, both in the EU and the rest of the world

“The regulations governing asset management remain unchanged, and the protections that were in place for clients yesterday remain in place today,” The Investment Association, the trade body representing UK fund managers, said

Aberdeen Asset Management dropped 32 per cent while Schroders tumbled 17 per cent and Henderson fell 16 per cent. Shares in Ashmore, the emerging market specialist, fell 47 per cent at one point before recovering to trade about 15 per cent lower. 

Man Group, the UK-listed hedge fund manager, traded 21 per cent lower while Legal and General, which runs one of Europe’s largest fund businesses, was down 21 per cent within minutes of the start of trading in London on Friday. 

“Most UK asset managers would suffer in a scenario of slower UK growth, higher inflation and weaker sterling and the associated negative moves in the UK equity markets,” said Haley Tam, an analyst with Citigroup in London. 

US asset managers also felt the impact, with BlackRock shares tumbling 5 per cent, Invesco tumbling 11 per cent and Legg Mason dropping 8 per cent in morning trading. 

Andrew Formica, chief executive of Henderson, the £92.7bn Anglo-Australian asset manager, said Brexit would be “a huge confidence shock” to the UK.

“People will worry about all the capital that has flowed on to the UK’s property market, particularly in London. The pound will really suffer and there will be significant political uncertainty, a change in the Tory party leadership, perhaps even another general election, more questions about Scotland’s future within the UK,” said Mr Formica. 

With all the votes counted, 51.9 per cent voted to sever Britain’s 43-year membership of the EU, 48.1 per cent to stay in.

John James, head of Europe for Vanguard, the world’s second largest asset manager said: “The result may lead to wide industry changes over the long term and we have a contingency working group in place to assess those changes”.

Analysts also warned that UK asset managers were likely to suffer as a result of the Brexit vote. 

Paul McGinnis, an analyst at broker Shore Capital, said fund houses were in for a rougher ride than the rest of the market.

“Asset managers will probably see even bigger falls than the underlying market. I suspect the share price moves will be more extreme that the underlying clients flows,” said Mr McGinnis.

Fund sales in the UK had already been affected by uncertainty preceding the referendum. According to Lipper, the research company, assets in the UK’s fund industry had fallen by nearly £200bn to £900bn during the past year.

“Questions now start in earnest over how the financial industry will operate without the ability to ‘passport’ UK-domiciled funds and products into the EU,” said Ms Tam.

Last year London was home to more than €1tn worth of Ucits, the name for those passported funds, ranking it on a par with Dublin and second only to Luxembourg.

Most UK fund managers domicile their fund ranges in either Dublin or Luxembourg and will still be able to sell their products into the EU market. 

“But there could be some negative backlash against UK fund managers,” said Ms Tam, adding that some European countries might demand that investment management staff are moved from the UK into the EU. 

Steven Maijoor, chairman of the European Securities and Markets Authority, the pan-European regulator, warned last month that the UK’s access to fund passporting arrangements would be “at risk” following a Brexit.

“There will be a big question mark about UK-registered investment [companies], UK-registered funds and fund prospectuses approved in London. Their legal status will be unclear in the event of a Brexit. This will result in uncertainty that will not be easily resolved in a couple of months,” he said.

Mr Formica said it could be five to ten years before the full implications of Brexit were understood properly. 

“Henderson will survive but it will be a tougher road for ourselves and our clients,” he added. 

