‘Not a good day for democracy’ – German critics attack ECB court ruling

2016-06-21

Critics of the European Central Bank’s stimulus measures have hit out at Germany’s powerful constitutional court after it gave a begrudging thumbs up to a landmark scheme to rescue indebted member states, bringing an end to four years of judicial wrangling.

In a judgement on Tuesday, the Karlsruhe-based court said the ECB’s “Outright Monetary Transactions” measures did not breach the country’s federal law as long as they met six broad conditions laid out by the European Court of Justice last year, writes Mehreen Khan. 

More than 35,000 German plaintiffs argued the measures were illegal, breaching a prohibition on the monetary financing of governments by central banks.

Following the opinion, Peter Gauweiler, one of the most high-profile opponents of the scheme and a former deputy chairman of Angela Merkel’s sister CSU party attacked Karlsruhe for lacking the courage to oppose the ECJ and “attempting to withdraw from the affair to save face”.

“Today is not a good day for democracy in Europe”, Mr Gauweiler said, adding:

Instead of effectively protecting the European allocation of competencies, the principle of democracy and the budgetary autonomy of the German parliament, the Court, while verbally maintaining its aspiration to fend off usurpations of competence by European Union bodies, has in reality backed down in the first serious conflict with the ECJ.

Another high profile critic from Germany’s much respect Ifo think-tank said the country’s taxpayers would be on the hook for rescuing other governments after today’s judgement.

Clemens Fuest, president of the Ifo, said the verdict was an “about turn” from the German court after it had effectively deemed OMT illegal in 2014, before asking for a recommendation from the ECJ last year.

Mr Fuest said:

That is a shame because it is obvious that the OMT programme primarily pursues the fiscal goal of preserving highly indebted states’ access to credit.

Without the Bundestag’s approval, German taxpayers are liable for a share of the risks arising as a result.

The conditions relating to the Bundesbank’s participation imposed by the ECJ are far too weak and should have been made more restrictive by the German Constitutional Court.

Its call for the Bundestag and the German government to permanently monitor risks to the German public budget arising from the ECB’s purchases is ineffective,” he added.

The ruling is also set to dampen any hopes the German court will strike down the ECB’s quantitative easing programme, which is subject to four legal challenges.

Gunnar Beck, a barrister and academic at the University of London who is representing a group of German academics and businessmen against QE, said OMT and the current QE scheme were “sufficiently similar” to lead to a positive judgement from Karlsruhe.

“There is nothing in this judgement that suggests the constitutional court is particularly keen to strike down QE” he said.

ECB observers and analysts however were more sanguine about the caveated ruling.

Christian Schulz at Citi said the court’s opinion had “eliminated a tail risk in the eurozone’s safety net”, adding that an important part of judgement was that it “did not order the German government and parliament to take action against OMT, but only to monitor any activation of the programme, in case the purchased assets constitute a budget risk.”.

The six conditions – which must include a limit to the bond buying and no pre-announcement of the measures – will be easily reached, said Kim Liu at ABN Amro.

It also paves the way for the court to provide further recommendations to tailor any ECB measures to ensure they are legal, he said, adding:

The favourable verdict by the German Court means that the ECB continues to have full access to its toolkit. This is important for two reasons.

The first is the impact of a possible Brexit on continental Europe. If a Brexit were to happen, and if contagion risks would lead to a sharp sell-off in peripheral bonds, the ECB can now still use the OMT to bring borrowing costs down for these countries.

Secondly, the verdict also means that the ECB could tweak the QE programme further without fear of any legal repercussions.

Under the current QE framework, the ECB already purchases bonds proportionally by using the ECB capital key, while under the OMT the ECB has much more flexibility. Today’s decision makes it more likely that possible future tweaks to the QE programme will also be permissible under German law.

However, Justin Knight at UBS says the requirement for member states to have market access to qualify for OMT will severely hamper the scope of the scheme.

“Countries tend only to request programmes (and all the conditionality that goes with them) when they’ve already lost market access”, said Mr Knight.

“The ECB does allow for OMT purchases when a country has regained market access in an adjustment programme, but the value of OMTs as a crisis-fighting measure would be slight if restricted to such a set of circumstances”.

