Braced for impact: what next for businesses after vote to leave?

2016-06-24

Now that Britain has voted to leave the EU, shareholders and regulators will be demanding to know how companies plan to deal with Brexit and how their operations are likely to be affected.

For business, this morning will either be the moment to put contingency plans into action — or to start scrambling to make those plans, since many boards have adopted a “wait and see” approach.

Trading conditions will not change immediately, although financial market volatility and any economic slowdown could affect demand for companies’ products and services.

However, company bosses will want to start lobbying government and Brussels hard for a business-friendly outcome to any divorce settlement with the EU. This will not just be a priority for UK companies but also for companies in Germany or France, which do significant business with the UK or for whom the country constitutes an important link in the supply chain.

“The negotiations around the UK’s new relationship with Europe will be driven more by politics than economics, especially given French and German elections next year,” said Mujtaba Rahman at London-based consultancy, Eurasia Group.

“Business leaders are therefore going to have to wise up on the peculiarities of European politics, as these will determine the final offer made to the UK.” 

While pro-Leave entrepreneurs and smaller companies, in particular, will rejoice at the prospect of an escape from onerous EU rules and regulations, as Brexit becomes a reality the landscape for business is likely to be transformed. For exporters and companies employing EU nationals, the changes could be dramatic.

“Trading conditions will be too uncertain for British businesses to undertake new investments, hire more workers or otherwise add to export capacity,” warned George Soros, the veteran investor, in the run-up to yesterday’s vote.

How much the realities for business will change in the long term will depend, crucially, on what arrangements Britain secures with trading partners inside the EU and beyond.

Financial services are likely to be hit if the terms of exit end the “passporting” rights that allow banks and other groups headquartered in London to do business freely with the EU. Jamie Dimon, JPMorgan’s chief executive, claimed in June that a Brexit could mean the loss of 4,000 UK-based jobs, a quarter of the bank’s staff in the country.

A vote against the EU could also turn out to become a vote against the United Kingdom

Chris Cummings, chief executive of TheCityUK, which lobbies on behalf of the sector, said that the message from the Square Mile would be to focus on ensuring continued access to the single market.

“We want government to focus very much on protecting the City in the upcoming negotiations, because it is Europe’s financial centre,” he said.

“The government must make sure that trade policies are ambitious, and protect access to existing markets as well as being bolstered by a renewed focus on higher growth markets. We’d like trade policy on steroids.” 

Farming, which received £3.1bn in EU funds last year, is also likely to be profoundly affected by exit. Support payments from the EU’s common agricultural policy (Cap) made up 55 per cent of UK farmers’ income in 2014. But many farmers maintain that a Brexit would allow them to escape unpopular Cap-related regulations, while money that previously went to Brussels could be used instead for subsidies more targeted at British needs.

The National Farmers’ Union argued that remaining in the EU was in farmers’ best interests and warned in April that, “if support was removed overnight, many family farms in the UK would not be viable”.

Trade barriers would hurt exporters and companies with supply chains that rely on imports, such as retailers and automotive suppliers — the UK is the EU’s second-largest market for new car purchases and a key base for car production.

In particular, the food and beverages sectors could face import tariffs into the EU of up to 45 per cent for dairy products. However, some food supplies could be obtained more cheaply from outside the bloc, since the UK would no longer be subject to the Cap.

Overall labour costs could rise if the free movement of workers from elsewhere in Europe is reduced or even abolished.

What was your initial feeling after you heard the results? What questions do you have now? Share your thoughts with the FT community here.

But Standard & Poor’s, the rating agency, argues that in the high value added aerospace sector, in which the UK has a trade surplus with the rest of the EU, the country is likely to remain part of multinational programmes to develop new military hardware given its membership of Nato and the size of its defence budget, Europe’s largest.

Indeed, both companies in global sectors such as defence as well as more local businesses may be more insulated from disruption by being less dependent on trade with the EU.

Many analysts argue there could be positive as well as negative effects.

Regulators may no longer be constrained by EU directives that require significant investment in telecoms and complicate the design of renewable generation and capacity subsidies for the energy sector.

“We believe even affected industries could also have the capacity to adapt, or even benefit, over time,” said Taron Wade at Standard & Poor’s, the rating agency.

.

