Bank of England says ‘all options open’ if UK exits EU

2016-06-16

All options will be on the table if Britain votes to leave the EU, the Bank of England said on Thursday, as it sought to reassure markets ahead of next Thursday’s referendum. 

The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee has significantly increased its assessment of the risks posed to global financial markets, saying in its latest meeting that there could be “adverse spillovers to the global economy” and that a Brexit is “possibly” the biggest risk to global markets. 

Until now, the MPC has said that risks from a Brexit are overshadowed by worries about emerging markets. 

This is a starker warning about the importance of next week’s vote than the Bank has previously given: until now it has felt that Brexit risk was overshadowed globally by risks from emerging markets. 

“The [Monetary Policy Committee] will take whatever action is needed, following the outcome of the referendum,” said the Bank, suggesting that interest rate changes or further unconventional monetary policies, such as quantitative easing, would be deployed in pursuit of the Bank’s remit to maintain price stability, while supporting growth and employment. 

But the MPC members warned that any monetary policy action would take some time to have an effect on the economy and stressed that interest rates could move up as well as down in the event of a Leave vote. 

It is widely expected that sterling will depreciate in the wake of a Brexit vote, driving inflation upwards at least in the short term. 

The value of sterling has tracked polling data over the past month. There was an appreciation in late May as a series of polls suggested a strengthening of the Remain vote, but sterling has depreciated sharply since then as new polls suggest growing support for Brexit.

Bank of England governor comes under fire from Eurosceptic MPs 

The Bank warned on Thursday that it would face a difficult trade-off in the event of a Leave vote between operating loose monetary policy to support output and employment on the one hand and stabilising inflation expectations on the other. 

But many market experts dismiss the idea that the Bank would push up interest rates in the wake of a Leave vote and argue it is much more likely that the Bank will loosen policy. 

The Bank’s statement on Thursday reiterated what it said last month about the response of monetary policy in the event of a Leave vote and marks the fifth month in a row that MPC members have unanimously voted to maintain interest rates at 0.5 per cent and retain the existing £375bn of quantitative easing.

The Bank is also preparing for more intensive supervision of and support for major financial institutions in the event of a vote to leave the EU to ensure they maintain enough liquidity, according to the minutes of the MPC’s June meeting, in which members discussed extensive contingency plans. The Financial Policy Committee will also pursue a number of financial stability measures.

————————-

Brexit? In or Out

What a British divorce from the EU would look likeHow any break-up is carried out will have a huge impact on Britain for generationsThe economic consequences of BrexitThree very different outcomes of a British vote to leave the EUWhat would Brexit mean for the City of London?There is a clear split over how a vote to leave would shape the capital’s future as a financial centreWhat the City stands to lose and gain from BrexitSectors such as foreign exchange trading have boomed during EU yearsWhat has the EU done for the UK?The long-running debate over the economic benefits of membership remains unresolved

————————-

