Asian markets up on Brexit polls, weaker yen

2016-06-20

Improved sentiment following weekend polls on the UK’s European Union membership referendum and a weaker yen were pushing up shares around Asia on Monday.

Ahead of Thursday’s EU membership vote, polls showed the lead of the Leave campaign had been trimmed. That was enough to power the British pound up by as much as 1.8 per cent to $1.4614, making it best-performing major global currency this morning.

In contrast, the yen was the worst-performing currency, 0.4 per cent weaker at ¥‎104.62 per dollar and likely spelling the end of a six-session winning streak. That gave an extra boost to the Japanese equities market, particularly currency-sensitive exporters, with the broad Topix and the Nikkei 225 both up by 2.2 per cent, putting them on track for their best gain in two months.

Australia’s S&P/ASX 200 was up 1.1 per cent, led by energy stocks after oil continued to climb after strong gains on Friday.

Hong Kong’s Hang Seng was up two-thirds of one per cent, while on the mainland, China’s Shanghai Composite and the Shenzhen Composite were both down 0.5 per cent.

Brexit concerns are likely to dominate investors’ concerns this week. Previous polls showed the Leave campaign gaining an edge over Remain, undermining the pound, pushing yields on UK gilts to record lows and spurring volatility across financial markets. Last week saw the second-largest outflow from UK funds over the past decade, according to Bank of America Merrill Lynch.

But polls over the weekend showed the Leave camp’s lead had been eroded, although the contest still remains very close.

Yields on government bonds in Japan and Australia, which move inversely to price, continued to recover off record lows hit late last week as market sentiment improved.

India will also be a focal point for investors today after Raghuram Rajan, the governor of the Reserve Bank of India, announced he would not seek an extension to his three-year terms, which ends on September 4.

Oil prices were buoyed by a weaker US dollar. Brent crude, the international benchmark, was up 0.7 per cent to $49.52 a barrel on Monday, having gained 4.2 per cent on Friday, while West Texas Intermediate, the US marker, was 0.9 per cent higher today at $48.42 after a 3.8 per cent advance in the previous session.

The dollar index, a measure of the US currency versus a basket of global peers, was down 0.6 per cent at 93.594 today and lining up for a four-day losing streak. The euro was 0.8 per cent firmer at $1.1365.

Markets are also waiting for the semi-annual testimony from the Federal Reserve chair, Janet Yellen, on Tuesday. This comes a week after the central bank decided to leave interest rates on hold as it noted the softening of the US labour market and potential hazards to the outlook from overseas, such as an adverse outcome from the Brexit vote.

