Brexit referendum: what is or isn’t already priced in?

2016-06-23

All major markets are now closed around the world, for a brief window before the polls close in the UK. What is priced in? Probably, it is fair to say, somewhere upwards of a 90 per cent chance that Remain wins, writes the FT’s John Authers

Sterling, the most obviously affected market, has pegged back only slightly from its high from the day, at which it had rallied by 6.67 per cent against the dollar in only a week – a remarkable rally. At just below $1.50, it is very close to estimates to purchasing power parity (as close as the foreign exchange market gets to a “fair value”).

As it is a popular call among FX analysts that a Leave vote would bring sterling down at least as far as $1.20 in short order (which would be a 31-year low), this bespeaks intense confidence in a Remain victory.

As for stocks, the FTSE-Eurofirst 300 index closed the day at its highest price/earnings ratio since the crisis, at roughly 28. This is partly because the latest earnings data was particularly bad, but still such a valuation would not be possible if traders wanted to price in a significant risk of an imminent British exit from the EU.

As for the US, where the referendum is also dominating conversation, the S&P 500 had a strong day to close needing to rally only by another 0.8 per cent to top the all-time high it set in May last year.

The degree of confidence in markets can be overstated. Bank stocks, which stand to be most affected by the referendum result, remain depressed, even if eurozone bank shares have gained 17 per cent in the last week. And bond yields remain historically low, even if the sharp rise in yields over the last week shows returning confidence. German 10-year bunds now yield 0.093 per cent, which is startlingly low, but still shows a sharp rebound in confidence after last week’s historic negative yields.

The market positioning is clear, and at this point a Leave vote could trigger a remarkable day of trading on Friday. If that were to happen, the embarrassment for bookies (putting the odds on a Remain at 8/1 on) and prediction markets would approach the humiliation suffered by pollsters at last year’s UK general election.

