Portuguese recovery will survive Brexit fears – PM Costa

2016-06-24

Portugal’s socialist prime minister has sought to reassure financial markets the former bailout country’s fragile economic recovery will not be blown off course by “inevitable turbulence” following the Brexit vote.

António Costa, whose minority “anti-austerity” government depends on parliamentary support from the radical left, said Portugal had sufficient cash buffers to meet its own financing needs until at least mid-2017, writes Peter Wise in Lisbon.

Mr Costa also pointed to a sharp fall in the country’s budget deficit as evidence that his policy of “turning the page on austerity” was compatible with deficit-reduction.

His comments came after yields on Portugal’s benchmark 10-year government bonds increased by 24 basis points on Friday to 3.3 per cent. The country’s PSI-20 share price index was down 7.5 per cent.

The finance ministry said on Friday the budget deficit had dropped to 3.2 per cent of national output in the first quarter, down from 5.5 per cent in the same period last year.

Mr Costa said this was the “best result since 2008” and meant that his seven-month-old government had already achieved more than €900m of the total €1.3bn cut in the deficit it has targeted for this year.

Speaking to reporters in Porto, the prime minister said the Brexit vote had “sent a very strong signal” that many Europeans no longer identified themselves “with what the EU has become”.

The other 27 EU members needed to reflect seriously on making the EU more useful and relevant to the lives of ordinary people, he said.

It was not a case of “more Europe or less Europe, but of a better Europe”. People, for example, did not want more EU bureaucracy, he said, but did want more security cooperation against terrorism..

The EU needed an economy that produced prosperity and a single currency that facilitated trade rather than lifting up some economies and penalising others, he added.

Mr Costa invoked the world’s “oldest alliance” between Portugal and the UK, saying Lisbon would do everything in its power to uphold the rights of Portuguese citizens living in Britain as well as British investment, trade and tourism targeted at Portugal.

