Brexit immigration message puts Boris Johnson on the spot

2016-06-17

As Boris Johnson’s battle bus pulls out of Norwich, the television screens showing the England vs Wales football match are abruptly retuned to the news: Jo Cox, a young Labour MP, has been shot and stabbed by a man reportedly shouting “Britain first”. 

A visibly shaken Mr Johnson comes down the bus to speak to the travelling press corps. A planned campaign visit to Ipswich is called off. “We have decided to suspend the campaign,” says Mr Johnson. “Our thoughts are very much with Jo.”

Earlier, during his Norwich rally, Mr Johnson was heckled by a man shouting: “You’re a racist!”

Mr Johnson, who grew up in Brussels as the son of a Eurocrat and is descended from Turkish migrants, plainly is not. As London’s mayor, he spent eight years celebrating the capital’s diversity. 

But critics say the campaign for Britain to leave the EU has been playing a dangerous game in recent weeks: relentlessly focusing on immigration in order to press home a message about “taking control” and a return to national sovereignty. 

Earlier in the day Mr Johnson denied that the campaign he was fronting appealed to a closed, nationalistic Britain. “No, no, no, no,” he exclaimed indignantly. “There are many ways we cannot engage with the world now because we are locked into the EU. Britain is a great and humane and progressive voice in world affairs. Our values are very important.”

He is happy to repeat: “I am passionately pro-immigration and pro-immigrants.”

But Britain’s most charismatic mainstream politician finds himself yoked together in the Brexit debate with Nigel Farage, the Ukip leader, who this week unveiled a poster showing a file of wretched refugees under the headline: “Breaking point.”

Mr Johnson says these are “not my politics” and that Mr Farage is not part of the official Leave campaign, but the message has helped to power the Leave campaign ahead in the polls. 

If Mr Cameron loses the referendum, many Tory MPs believe the prime minister would be out of Downing Street by the autumn. Mr Johnson is the favourite to succeed him, and the widely held suspicion at Westminster is that the former mayor put his own ambitions before the national interest.

Mr Johnson denies that categorically. But if he does become prime minister on the back of a Brexit vote, he will have to reconcile the open, “One Nation”, immigration-friendly country that he wants to build with the defensive, apprehensive Britain that has emerged during the campaign he has fronted.

“The reason for taking back control is that it’s one of the ways you neutralise the nasty politics in immigration,” he says. “By returning power over border policy to national politicians, the public are put back in charge. “If you don’t like it you can kick them out.”

Mr Johnson suggests his interest is mainly in establishing national sovereignty – firing out the “take control” mantra at regular intervals — rather than radically cutting the net 330,000 migration total, although he does say that it is “running too high”.

Cameron and Corbyn call for unity after killing of Labour MP

He declines to endorse Mr Cameron’s target of reducing immigration to “the tens of thousands”, saying: “I am not going to get into numbers.” He still favours an amnesty on illegal immigrants in Britain.

The nuances of Mr Johnson’s position seem to be lost on many of the people of Cromer on the Norfolk coast, who flock to be pictured with the 51-year-old on the town’s pier, and who regularly cite curbing immigration as their principal concern.

“People fought in the second world war for this country, to stop this invasion,” says Roger Aldridge, a retired farm manager. “Now they’re letting them all in.” His wife Margaret says: “We have had enough of migration – we want Britain to be Britain again.”

Immigration has become a metaphor for everything that is wrong with the country, a stick to beat politicians who break their promises, rather than necessarily a big factor in their daily lives. Asked whether many migrants actually live in Cromer, Mr Aldridge says they do not. “It’s in Great Yarmouth really,” he says.

Watching Mr Johnson deploy his hair-ruffling charm, it is easy to see why he is such a potent weapon for the Brexit camp. Polls suggest that voters trust him much more than Mr Cameron.

————————-

UK’s EU Referendum: How people would vote

For a more detailed summary of opinion polling visit the FT’s Brexit poll tracker page

————————-

Last week the prime minister ordered attacks on Mr Johnson to suggest he was only motivated by a desire to reach Number 10, insinuating that the former mayor was a self-interested politician just like the rest of them. It does not seem to have worked.

‘I am what I am,’ says the Ukip leader over six pints, a bottle of wine and two glasses of port

“This is a campaign that has mobilised people who don’t feel they have been able to get their voice across before and who do feel the way the EU works is a stitch up against their interests,” says Mr Johnson.

His emergence as the spokesman for an anti-establishment revolution is hardly attributable to his background as an Old Etonian, Oxford-educated, long-time politician. Rather it is his willingness — like Donald Trump in the US — to take on the establishment and to speak apparently unpalatable “truths”.

Mr Johnson admits his decision to back the Brexit campaign was “heart-wrenching” and that his many French, German and Italian friends have a “slightly wounded look in their eyes” when they ask him how he ended up as the frontman of a crusade to take Britain out of the EU. He loves Europe, just not the EU.

Such was his apparent agonising on the issue that he does not deny writing two articles for the Daily Telegraph on March 16 making contradictory arguments, contingent on which side of the campaign he finally joined.

The spiked article would have bound “Bojo” to David Cameron and his attempt to keep the country in the EU. Instead he finds himself as a globalist heading a campaign that has stirred nativist passions, a man eyeing victory but uneasy with the forces that the debate has unleashed. 

————————-

Brexit? In or Out

What a British divorce from the EU would look likeHow any break-up is carried out will have a huge impact on Britain for generationsThe economic consequences of BrexitThree very different outcomes of a British vote to leave the EUWhat would Brexit mean for the City of London?There is a clear split over how a vote to leave would shape the capital’s future as a financial centreWhat the City stands to lose and gain from BrexitSectors such as foreign exchange trading have boomed during EU yearsWhat has the EU done for the UK?The long-running debate over the economic benefits of membership remains unresolved

————————-

