A historic night for the pound that stunned a market

2016-06-24

The pound at $1.50 had such a lovely, clean ring to it.

In the increasingly bitter referendum campaign, sterling was the barometer for how global investors believed the British public would vote.

So when the UK currency briefly rose above the $1.50 mark about an hour after voting ended late on Thursday, it seemed merely to cement markets’ confidence that the electorate had decided to stick with what they know. 

After all, yet another opinion poll had just pointed to a Remain victory and even Nigel Farage, leader of arch-Eurosceptic party Ukip, appeared to throw in the towel.

However, by the time dawn broke over a divided UK, the market had dragged the value of the pound more than 17 cents lower, thrown the yen, the euro and many other currencies into violent swings and reignited fears of a renewal of currency wars.

And as the London trading day closed, foreign exchange traders and strategists were wrestling with whether the currency had further to fall. 

Traders compared Friday’s brutal shifts in sterling to the pound’s calamities during the 2008 crash and Black Wednesday in 1992. In some respects, they were worse. 

From peak to trough on Friday, sterling moved over a range as wide as 13.5 per cent, far in excess of the scope the currency experienced during those two cataclysmic episodes in its recent history.

Nothing encapsulated the damage visited on the pound more than the 120 seconds of trading exactly 16 minutes after midnight, London time.

Investors, already feeling queasy about sterling following the Leave camp’s better than expected result from Newcastle, abandoned the pound when Sunderland declared an even more startling Brexit victory. Sterling went from $1.48 to below $1.43. 

“That got the heart thumping,” says David Bloom, FX strategist at HSBC.

So, for others, did sterling’s sudden lurch upwards 10 minutes later, as well as another wild gyration at 12:55am that had the pound yo-yoing from $1.46 to $1.40 and back again in less than an hour.

“They happened very, very quickly,” says a senior manager at a major bank’s FX trading desk. The swings were driven by currency flows created by market makers setting fresh prices — based on referendum results from metropolitan areas that seemed to have put the Remain camp back on track. 

“It didn’t last long,” adds the trader. Indeed not. Just before 4am in London, sterling’s final resistance was broken. The reality of Brexit could no longer be avoided and the $1.40 level, a threshold sterling has rarely dropped below in the last 50 years, was breached.

The only question left was how far it would fall. The year’s low of $1.3733 was brushed aside. So, too, was $1.35, a level not experienced since the Grande Dame of Euroscepticism, Margaret Thatcher, was in power, as order books rather than flows drove the pound to its worst ever decline of 11.1 per cent.

For weeks, FX trading houses had fretted over this night, throwing resources at their London desks to ensure they were manned through the early Asian hours, when liquidity is not as deep as at other global trading periods and the nuances of British politics can be lost.

“We were worried how many people in Asia would know where Sunderland was,” says another senior trader at a leading bank.

At ICAP, the brokers who negotiate trades over the phone, about a quarter of the office had been in since 2am. Traders at other houses remarked how a frenetic night had got their body clocks preparing their stomachs for lunch, only to realise it was barely 6am. “It was all hands to the pump,” says a broker.

Some were taken aback by the size of moves in the yen, even though it is the go-to currency when investors are seized by risk aversion. 

Excitement was generated by the yen’s rise against the dollar, which took it through the key ¥100 mark that was expected to trigger Japanese government intervention — but a notable development was the yen’s 18 per cent rise against the pound.

It was a massive move among many big FX swings. Yet by the time UK prime minister David Cameron had resigned and a fall in UK stocks dominated the London session, currency traders and analysts had come round to the view that there was something perfectly understandable and orderly about the volatility they had just lived through.

“It makes perfect sense,” says Mr Bloom of HSBC. “The market was convinced it would be a Remain vote, and it settled on the $1.50 level. And as soon as it became clear it was a Leave vote, sterling came off as information kept coming in.”

Just as telling was the subdued mood in the foreign-exchange market during the London session, when several rates corrected by about 15 per cent from earlier lows, including the pound against the dollar. “The market looked much healthy,” says a senior FX manager.

Sterling’s decline, however, may be a long way from done. “This isn’t over,” says Mr Bloom. “It’s not a one-off event. You can’t price in a future that you don’t know. The markets are trying to settle down and find a level. But it doesn’t mean the market is done.” 

For some market commentators, sterling is destined to reach another round number — $1.20. 

