Cameron cites murdered MP in neck-and-neck Brexit race

2016-06-19

David Cameron has invoked the memory of the murdered Labour MP Jo Cox to press the case for Britain staying in the EU, amid signs of tensions in the Leave camp as the referendum campaign enters its final week.

The prime minister tweeted a link to the last article written by Ms Cox, saying: “Jo Cox’s strong voice in the campaign to remain in the EU will be badly missed.”

With opinion polls suggesting the race is neck-and-neck after a swing to Remain, pro-Brexit figures argued publicly over the tone of their campaign, amid criticism that its focus on immigration had created an ugly mood in Britain.

The House of Commons will be recalled on Monday to pay tribute to Ms Cox, whose alleged killer Thomas Mair told a courtroom on Saturday his name was “Death to traitors, freedom for Britain”.

Legal experts have warned of constitutional chaos after a vote for Brexit because the primacy of EU law is enshrined in the devolution agreements of Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Westminster MPs would need the consent of the devolved parliaments and assemblies. 

Seeking such consent would be likely to enrage Scottish voters, a majority of whom, polls suggest, are likely to vote in favour of remaining in the bloc, and would fuel demands for a second independence referendum.

Ms Cox’s death led to the suspension of the referendum campaign, putting the brakes on a Leave surge. “We had momentum until this terrible tragedy,” said Nigel Farage, leader of the UK Independence party, on ITV’s Peston on Sunday. 

But the murder has also dramatically changed the terms of the debate ahead of Thursday’s vote, with Mr Cameron claiming the Leave camp has created a hostile and intolerant climate in the country through its focus on immigration.

Along with its principal message that Brexit would inflict serious harm on the economy, the Remain campaign is trying to associate itself with the public revulsion felt over the murder of the 41-year-old Yorkshire MP.

An online poster shows a torn Union Jack flag with the accompanying slogan: “Remain kind, remain open, remain inclusive, remain tolerant, remain together. Vote Remain.”

————————-

UK’s EU Referendum: How people would vote

For a more detailed summary of opinion polling visit the FT’s Brexit poll tracker page

————————-

Chris Patten, the former Conservative chairman, writes in the Financial Times that while it would be a “ reckless untruth” to link Ms Cox’s death to the Leave campaign, he accuses Mr Farage of peddling “filth”.

Turning his fire on the two senior Tories leading the Brexit campaign, he said: “The ruefully sanctimonious Vote Leave campaigners Michael Gove and Boris Johnson may want to reflect on some of the company they keep and the arguments they use.”

With polls appearing to turn against Leave, Mr Gove distanced himself from a poster unveiled by Mr Farage last week depicting Syrian refugees at the Slovenian border with the slogan “Breaking Point”, saying he “shuddered” when he saw it.

Mr Farage retaliated by saying his poster was no more “strong” than an official Vote Leave poster claiming that Turkey was about to join the EU and that Britain would be subject to a new wave of immigration.

But former Conservative party chairman Sayeeda Warsi said on Sunday night that the “Breaking Point” poster and “hate and xenophobia” were behind her decision to defect from the Leave campaign and opt for Britain to remain in the EU.

Vote Leave expressed surprise that Baroness Warsi had been part of the Brexit campaign in the first place.

Mr Cameron told a BBC Question Time debate audience that aspects of the Leave campaign were divisive. He said: Mr Farage’s poster was “just wrong”, adding: “It’s an attempt to frighten people and divide people.”

The FT’s poll of polls puts the two sides level on 44 per cent, but politicians and business have learnt not to put much faith in opinion polls, leading to great uncertainty over Britain’s future. Turnout will be a big factor in a vote that could determine Mr Cameron’s future as prime minister as well as the UK’s European destiny.

Much of this weekend’s opinion polling was carried out before Ms Cox’s murder, suggesting that there was already a “flight to the status quo” under way, as voters took stock on the potential risk of a Brexit to their personal finances.

Additional reporting by Sarah Gordon

