Free Lunch: If you break it, you own it

2016-06-24

When the dust settles, expect pain and buyers’ remorse

The real tragedy of the British vote to leave the EU is that it will make it harder, not easier, to solve the problems many voters blame on Europe. It will in addition destroy a great many advantages the British people enjoy.

Start with the destruction.

The market swings, dramatic as they are, are not in themselves all that significant. The Bank of England is well equipped to deal with them. The crash in sterling and asset prices of course amounts to a one-off hit to British living standards and to the terms on which UK businesses can finance themselves. But they will eventually settle down, albeit at a lower level. The large British current account deficit (which means that the UK relies on foreign investors for its consumption level) is often cited as a cause for concern. But the deficit is partly accounted for by rising net payments on cross-border asset holdings, whose real value will fall in line with sterling given the currency denomination of those assets. So a sterling crash, while painful, need not be dangerous.

What matters much more is the likely effect on real economic activity. The market turmoil, and even more the radical political and legal uncertainty that the vote has unleashed, will cast a chill on investment decisions by companies and spending decisions by households. A loss in international creditworthiness is on the cards, which will make this worse. Less investment and a higher savings rate are a recipe for recession (and nobody can say they weren’t warned) that only powerful policy can cushion. That will very probably require an emergency Budget; and it will put a huge burden on the BoE to soften the blow. The bank’s theoretical explorations of negative rates may soon come in handy.

Then for the false promises. No matter what the leading Leave campaigners have said, let alone what they now say, the arguments that won the vote were arguments against foreigners — against sitting around a table with foreigners and making decisions in common that would be binding on all; and against letting foreigners work, contribute taxes and more than pay their way in the UK.

But making common rules with foreigners is a prerequisite for modern trade, which Leavers say they want. And letting Europeans work in the UK has helped the public finances, which allows for more not less generous public services — the strain on which is the chief reason given by those who want less immigration. Leaving the EU, if it really means “taking our country back” from the foreigners, will harm both trade and public services.

It is therefore not true to say of the Labour party, as many are doing, that its halfhearted pro-Remain stance means it was out of touch with the priorities of working-class voters, who broke strongly for Leave. EU membership has increased the UK’s ability to meet those priorities — and left it with more than enough control to have chosen not to do so — and Brexit will reduce that ability, as will become clear once the country is forced to focus on what it wants in the place of the EU.

Immigration and trade will be the two big questions to resolve as the UK maps a course forward, and the trade-off will be immediate. In the most illuminating of the many quick reactions to the vote, the Centre for European Reform’s John Springford quite rightly writes: “The best way to manage the economic risks would be for the EU to make a quick offer for the UK to join the European Economic Area” — also known as the “Norway option”. This retains almost all trade access, but also free movement which is anathema to the main motivation for having voted Leave. The rest of the EU would no doubt be satisfied with a Norway-style arrangement, but this only looks realistic as a way station while looser relations are worked out, as proposed by the Adam Smith Institute. And as an explicitly temporary solution, it is the least stabilising arrangement that might — just might — be acceptable to both sides.

But only if the UK can formulate a realistic ultimate destination for its relationship with Europe. As Jonathan Portes writes, UK leaders now have to find some way to implement the voters’ demand for less immigration. That will not be all that easy — as demonstrated by the fact that net non-EU immigration, which presumably is “under control”, has always outnumbered net EU immigration.

But what seems certain is that satisfying the promise to curtail free movement of labour also means having to give up on the European Economic Area or any commensurate access to Europe’s single market. What, then, could be agreed? Again, Springford hits the nail on the head, by pointing out that a goods-only tariff-free deal should be desirable for all parties:

“The outline of the agreement is obvious, and could be settled quickly, with the negotiations focused on the details. There are to be no tariffs on goods. The UK agrees to match the EU’s goods market regulations, with the Commission given the right to suspend market access if the UK fails to do so. The free movement of workers ends. But the EU’s price would be that the UK leave the services single market, which will mean that banks will have to set up subsidiaries in the EU and be supervised by EU authorities.”

Even this would leave the UK under some residual control by decisions made in Brussels — and now with no influence over what they are — and of course would exclude the services at which Britain excels. Even aside from the economic shock and political chaos the vote will soon cause, that is a best-case scenario likely to bring voters a lot of buyers’ remorse. But that is the truth about democracy: actions have consequences.

Numbers news

To receive Martin Sandbu's Free Lunch by email every workday, sign up here.

