Change of tone in EU Brexit battle after Jo Cox attack

2016-06-17

On the morning of Jo Cox’s murder, the UK Independence party unveiled its biggest ever advertising campaign, featuring a photo of Syrian refugees and the headline “Breaking Point”. 

Its political opponents — including the Scottish first minister Nicola Sturgeon — condemned the billboards as “disgusting”. But Nigel Farage, Ukip’s leader, rejected accusations of racism. 

“Frankly, as you can see from this picture, most of the people coming are young males,” he said. “The EU has made a fundamental error that risks the security of everybody.”

All campaigning ahead of the EU referendum remains suspended following the attack on Cox, a 41-year-old Labour MP. When it does resume, it is certain to assume a very different tone. 

The onus will not just be on Mr Farage, whose anti-immigration message has marked the last leg of the debate. Campaigners on all sides are open to accusations of negativity and excessive rhetoric. 

“How foul this referendum is,” the novelist Robert Harris wrote on Twitter on Friday, summing up the feelings of many voters. “The most depressing, divisive, duplicitous political event of my lifetime. May there never be another.” 

Vote Leave, the official Out campaign, is likely to find that its heated attacks on the “elites” now look out of place.

It has focused on David Cameron’s credibility, with videos such as “You can’t trust David Cameron on immigration”. On Thursday morning it also stepped up its criticism of Mark Carney, Bank of England governor, for his past career at Goldman Sachs. “Meet Mark Carney, a close family friend of George Osborne,” began an official video published online. “Carney worked for Goldman Sachs for 10 years, earning millions in bonuses.”

It is time for us to reflect on the increasingly visceral tone of politics in Britain, writes Sebastian PayneRead on

On Friday, in contrast, the hashtag ThankYourMP was trending on Twitter, with users praising the work of their elected representatives. 

Similarly, catchphrases about “making Britain great again” and “taking our country back” — both of which have been used by some pro-Brexit campaigners — may no longer fit with a national mood of political unity. 

The Remain campaign will also have to change its own tone and message. Mr Cameron has been accused of scaremongering about the economic and security risks of leaving the EU. 

Although he has struck a moderate tone on immigration recently, last year he was criticised for referring to refugees as a “swarm”. “I was not intending to dehumanise,” he said at the time.

The date of the referendum — next Thursday, June 23 — is unlikely to be moved. That means those involved in the campaign have only a few days in which to show they understand the public mood, while avoiding being seen to politicise Cox’s death. 

————————-

UK’s EU referendum: full coverage and analysis

View the FT’s comprehensive guide to the vote on whether Britain should stay in Europe, with all the latest news, analysis and commentary from both sides of the debate. See more 

————————-

