Brexit: Retail brokers under pressure as markets seize up

2016-06-24

UK retail investors faced difficulties trading on Friday morning as the rush to sell stocks following the EU referendum result caused markets to seize up.

Retail brokers — including Hargreaves Lansdown, AJ Bell and TD Direct Investing — reported difficulties getting prices from market makers as the London exchange opened. 

Customers of Hargreaves Lansdown complained they were unable to trade, but Hargreaves blamed delays on market makers, who are responsible for pricing stocks and shares. 

“It’s because of the sheer volume of trades going to auction,” said Danny Cox of Hargreaves Lansdown.

AJ Bell, the UK retail broker with £28bn of assets under administration, said it was experiencing a “roughly fivefold increase” in trading volume this morning.

“I think the reality is that early doors there wasn’t a lot of liquidity in the market,” said the company. “The market makers weren’t giving quotes, so we weren’t able to fulfil a lot of those early trades.

“I spoke to our guys about 15 minutes ago [at the market opening] and they said there wasn’t a lot coming back from the market makers.”

AJ Bell said that although liquidity had improved by 9.30am, things were “not back to normal”.

“It is still slow and it will depend on what sort of trades are being requested,” said AJ Bell. “Our [trading] guys are heads down, trying to get things moving.”

Although brokers say details of trading trends among retail investors would not be available until late morning or early afternoon, TD Direct Investing said customers were mainly selling. “Three-quarters of our customers are selling,” said Michelle McGrade, TD’s chief investment officer.

TD Direct also reported it was dealing with triple its average trading volume this morning — and was having difficulty processing trades. 

“There are huge volumes and because of the way the UK stock market works everything is slowed up,” said Ms McGrade. “It’s a market-wide thing and it’s hitting all the [brokers].”

Despite high trading volumes, investors have been cautioned against overtrading. 

“We would urge investors to avoid a knee-jerk reaction,” said Laith Khalaf, senior analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown. “If you see a big market fall, that’s not the best time to sell.”

Fidelity International, the asset manager with a retail trading platform, also urged caution. “This is a moment for investors to take a deep breath and focus on their long-term investment goals,” said Tom Stevenson, investment director at Fidelity. 

TD Direct said UK lender Lloyds Banking Group was the most highly traded stock among retail investors, making up 15 per cent of trades, closely followed by Barclays.

Investors were both buying and selling the stock, the broker said, with any pattern aside from high volume unclear.

Fidelity International’s investor platform also said it could not see “an overall theme” for retail trading by lunchtime on Friday.

“Some investors are seeing this time as a buying opportunity, mainly into UK equities, while others are considering moving into safe havens of cash and gold,” said a spokesperson for the company.

“This is broadly in line with what we expected in that investors are repositioning their investment portfolios, but importantly, they don’t seem to be overreacting to the result.”

