Reasons to rejoice about the breach

2016-06-24

Any Brexiter telling you that they have all the answers on what happens next will receive a poor reception from an intelligent audience. It should be perfectly clear, from the gyrations of the markets to the turmoil in the Conservative party, that some details, to put it mildly, about what life will be like after Britain leaves the EU remain to be worked out.

Equally, I urge you not to despair. The UK is not leaving Europe. That would be geographically impossible and artistically and economically undesirable. It is the EU that British voters have decided, in their wisdom, to leave. The great continent of Europe, with its durable culture, is thousands of years old. The EU with its flag, as distinct from the earlier European Economic Community, is simply a struggling political superstructure that has been in existence for a mere 23 years. 

If those involved in the diplomacy to come are sensible enough, it should not be beyond the wit and wisdom of man to arrange a way for us to sell each other motor cars, wine, holidays, films and financial services.

Here I acknowledge that many a Remainer observing the negotiations to come will feel an understandable urge to say that this is now the Brexiters’ problem and good riddance. Once the immediate shock of this result has been absorbed, however, it is greatly to be hoped that such feelings of anger are replaced with a realisation that the British are, to paraphrase George Osborne, the chancellor of the exchequer, “all in this together”.

To that end, I was one of many who undertook publicly to respect and embrace the result, whatever it turned out to be. Now, one must hope that the patriotic British Remainers resist any temptation to behave as bad losers and instead join in making this work — because their expertise is needed.

In this national venture, first on the list must be safeguarding the City of London, of course. Unfortunately, the place seems to be going through one of its once-every-30-years panics about what on earth is to become of it. Yet why would the EU now risk blowing up its own highly successful capital market — London — on which it relies and which settles and clears so much euro-denominated business? 

Again, if the EU and the European Central Bank does choose the self-harm option, the City will reinvent itself organically as it has done countless times — not least when the eurobond was invented in 1963 by Siegmund Warburg, the British banker, a decade before Britain even joined the EEC.

Also consider the non-monetary reasons to be pleased about the result. Poorer voters have declined to be bullied and they have asserted the primacy of their national parliament in an expression of civic engagement. London has been given a long overdue introduction to the strength of feeling outside the capital. Meanwhile, neighbours and friends in the EU who recognise that the bloc is failing have been sent a signal that democratic change that annoys Brussels is possible.

The prime minister thought he could win a vote aimed at settling a Tory feud, writes Nick Clegg 

Leave’s victory may also resolve, at last, a tension that has bedevilled the Tory party, and more importantly the country, since the fall of Margaret Thatcher. How can we ensure states and their citizens benefit from dramatically in­creased trade and a measure of global regulatory co-operation without sacrificing so much sovereignty that the voters feel distant and eventually with good cause say “enough”, as they just have in the UK?

In Britain a democratic accident of this kind was always waiting to happen because of the flaw at the heart of the Thatcherite programme, not least in relation to EU policy. In the market reforms of the 1980s, and in the creation of the European single market, of which she was initially an advocate, the Tory prime minister and her adherents were clear what they wanted for the new Europe and indeed for the world. They were for open, global markets and for free-flowing capital — an outlook at least partially adopted by the EU.

There was a problem, however. Thatcher was as much a fierce nationalist as a free-marketeer. It was only late in her final term that she and her supporters realised that, in pushing successfully for the primacy of open markets in what later became the EU, she had sacrificed way too much sovereignty and undermined democratic legitimacy.

More than a quarter of a century later this turns out to be one of the central dilemmas of the age in which we live, when the trend is towards power-hungry supranational bodies of which the EU is the ultimate example.

In response UK voters have made a brave, historically important declaration in favour of self-government and against the dual curse of excessive scale and corporatism. It is in all our interests to make it work. 

The writer is an author and political commentator

