Free Lunch: Fool’s gold from the populists

2016-06-20

Trade, toil and trouble

Last weekend Prospect magazine published my essay on international trade and populism in the US, analysing the economic impact of especially China on Donald Trump’s voting constituency. I would like to extract two key points, as there are interesting similarities with the UK.

First, while globalisation and inequality have increased in tandem for many decades, the consensus within economics until about 2000 was that technology, not trade, was the main cause. Much more recently, however, economists have acknowledged that inequality reflects social and political changes as well, and that the “China shock” when the country joined the World Trade Organisation in 2001 was something of a different nature than the trade liberalisation that came immediately before it. Recent research shows that Chinese trade penetration caused deep and lasting job losses that were concentrated in US localities particularly exposed to it.

Second, the populations of the afflicted places have legitimate grievances. Not only have about a third of manufacturing jobs disappeared, most of them since 2000, but the knock-on effects on livelihoods in other sectors have largely hit the same concentrated areas. These are communities in crisis where working-class middle-aged whites are dying at rising rates, and Trump enjoys greater support the more severe the mortality rate is, as Jeff Guo has demonstrated in the Washington Post’s Wonkblog. President Obama’s economic advisers are on the case: witness Jason Furman’s Foreign Affairs article about America’s low employment rate.

Trump has only empty promises to offer, but his support among the desperate is understandable if tragic. And the frustration he channels — a sense of betrayal at the hands of elites, and of being taken advantage of by foreigners — is the same as the populist siren everywhere. In particular, “make America great again” is the same song as “take back control” in the UK.

With one superficial difference. Trump rants against free trade (especially with China) and immigrants with equal opportunity. UK Brexiters rant against immigration but ostensibly welcome even freer trade (especially with large emerging economies such as China). From an economic point of view this makes little sense: the impact on the wages of low-skilled Britons from trading with countries that have a lot of low-skilled workers should be the same as that of low-skilled immigration. In this sense, the Trump platform is more economically consistent than the perspective offered by most Brexiters.

Since the UK joined the EU, non-EU immigrants have outnumbered EU ones every year — but that does not seem to stop people from seeing EU immigration as the biggest challenge. So it’s worth examining the effect on low-skilled immigration from EU countries in more detail. In particular because conventional economic reasoning would suggest this could, in isolation, hurt native low-skilled workers. It is a puzzle — and those in favour of free movement should recognise this — that it is so hard to find evidence that this has actually happened.

One piece of evidence and one admission have been given a wide airing in the latest bout of the campaign. The admission was by Stuart Rose, the head of the official Remain campaign, who earlier this year told a parliamentary hearing that Brexit would increase wages if it meant restricting EU immigration. The evidence was in the form of Bank of England research, which found a small negative impact of immigration on wages of lower-skilled natives.

How small? Very small. As Jonathan Portes has explained, the headline number — that a 10 percentage point increase in immigration lowers wages by 2 per cent (actually 1.88 and that includes immigrants’ own wages, without which the right number is 1.34) — has been misinterpreted by Leave campaigners who have confused percentage point changes with per cent changes. Doing the calculation right, Portes finds that the Bank of England result implies that the wage effect of immigration in the semi-skilled sector “amounts to a reduction in annual pay rises of about a penny an hour” since the 2004 EU expansion to formerly communist countries.

Even this, however, does not mean Brexit would raise wages for the lower-skilled by that small amount even if it did cut immigration. Lord Rose’s off-message moment is an opportunity to explain why. He said: “If you are short of labour the price will, frankly, go up.” But that is true, if at all, of relative wages — the amount of value added that is claimed by the lower-skilled instead of higher-skilled workers or owners of capital. The Trades Union Congress quickly responded with ways in which Brexit would hurt the bargaining power of the lower-skilled so as to invalidate Rose’s Economics 101 conjecture. But the bigger point is another conceptual confusion, between relative and absolute wages. Even if relative low-skilled wages went up, the hit to the economy’s productivity from Brexit (see the main estimates in the chart below) would mean all wages and profits would on average fall by much more.

As in the US, there are groups in the UK that have had a raw deal from economic changes over the past 40 years and who have a legitimate grievance. These grievances could be dealt with more ambitious policies. Michael O’Connor writes: “If billions are being paid in taxes by migrants, the government could put these billions into providing services and infrastructure to match. But it isn’t. It is choosing instead to put any money into reducing the deficit to nil by the politically-inspired and ultimately arbitrary date of 2020…it would be entirely possible to hypothecate these amounts and redistribute them to the public services or parts of the country where they might be needed.” Something equivalent could be said for the US and the areas that have paid the costs of free trade.

But in either case, note that these are policies that the countries in question are entirely free to do at the moment. There is no need to take back control; there is a need to put the control they have to better use.

Other readables

Numbers news

To receive Martin Sandbu’s Free Lunch by email every workday, sign up here.

————————

UK’s EU referendum: full coverage and analysis

View the FT’s comprehensive guide to the vote on whether Britain should stay in Europe, with all the latest news, analysis and commentary from both sides of the debate. See more 

————————-

