City of London’s business leaders shocked by Brexit

2016-06-24

The City of London’s business leaders have responded with shock and horror to news of the vote for the UK to leave the European Union, with several acknowledging the growing divide between Britain’s elite and those at the bottom of society as a cause.

“A ghastly day for the UK, a ghastly day for Europe,” said Guy Hands, the Guernsey-based head of private equity firm Terra Firma. “One huge step back towards the past history of European conflicts.”

Sir Mike Rake, chairman of BT and former head of the CBI employers’ organisation, warned: “We are going to pay a high price for the breakdown of trust in the establishment … Emotion has trumped facts and untruths have been believed.”

Ruby McGregor-Smith, chief executive of facilities management group Mitie, and Sir Richard Lambert, former FT editor and now chairman of the Fair Education Alliance, were among those to highlight the wealth gap as a driver of the vote. “This vote represents in part the frustration of those who have not benefited from economic growth in recent decades,” said Sir Richard. 

The comments were part of a snap debate among the FT City Network, which also reflected fears about the political and economic fall-out.

Alexis de Rosnay, who heads broker Canaccord Genuity, bemoaned the removal of “our only common glue to be competitive globally” while David Morgan, European head of private equity firm JC Flowers, said the vote would prompt “sharply heightened concern” over other economic blackspots – from the eurozone to Japanese sovereign debt. 

Mayhem and damage controlBusiness leaders rush to reassure despite share falls

Lombard liveAdrenalin runs high as traders rush to make sense of it all

Alison Carnwath, chairman of Land Securities, and Lady Barbara Judge, chairman of the Institute of Directors, worried the result would aid the electoral chances of Donald Trump in the US.

The FT City Network spans more than 50 chairmen, chief executives and other senior leaders across the banking and investment community and beyond. It debates topical subjects each month.

Alongside the outpourings of anger and dismay, more prominent figures, such as John McFarlane, chairman of Barclays and of the CityUK lobby group, and Sir Roger Carr, chairman of BAE Systems, sought to calm the jitters. They and others appealed for the City and the broader business community to engage with government to aid negotiations with the EU. Paul Drechsler, chairman of the CBI, said: “It is vital to work with government on next steps.” 

