A tale of disciplined outers and complacent inners

2016-06-24

When Dominic Cummings realised that Britain had voted to leave the EU the balding 44-year-old stood up on a desk and gave the ceiling a hearty punch.

For the combative Vote Leave campaign chief it was vindication of his political strategy. It also marked a personal triumph over David Cameron, a man he had once dismissed as a “sphinx without a riddle”.

At the start of the coalition government Mr Cameron had tried to prevent Michael Gove, then education secretary, from hiring Mr Cummings as his special adviser: he feared that he would be too divisive.

Standing alongside Mr Cummings and around 50 Vote Leave staffers in the campaign’s Vauxhall headquarters on Thursday night was Peter Cruddas, another senior Tory with an axe to grind against Mr Cameron.

In 2012, the self-made spread-betting billionaire had been accused by the Sunday Times of offering access to Mr Cameron in return for cash donations. The City financier quit as Conservative treasurer and was shunned by the party, “excommunicated”, in his words. Later he sued the newspaper for libel with success, though the Court of Appeal reduced the award.

For both men, it was a moment to savour: the downfall of the prime minister who had pushed them aside.

The Leave campaign won despite its flaws. The two main Brexit groups, Boris Johnson’s Vote Leave and Nigel Farage’s Leave.EU, publicly insulted each other throughout the campaign. Neither had access to party lists of voters, nor did they together manage to organise as many events as the Remain campaign.

“We were a B-campaign; we didn’t have the resources,” said Kwasi Kwarteng, a Vote Leave MP. “But they [Remain] were a D-campaign.” 

The difference in personnel was marked. Britain Stronger In Europe’s leadership, including Will Straw and Ryan Coetzee, were dismissively labelled “the people who lost the general election” by one Tory. 

Now that David Cameron has announced he will resign as prime minister, his badly split Conservative party faces a potentially divisive leadership contest — one that will take months to resolve.Read on

In contrast one of Vote Leave’s founders, Matthew Elliott, had run the successful 2011 campaign against the alternative vote system, while Mr Cummings had lobbied effectively against the euro and the creation of a north-eastern assembly.

Mr Cameron’s aides and advisers flocked to join the Remain camp after he announced the result of his renegotiation with the EU in February. Conservative campaigners brought with them the digital campaigning tools they hoped would give them a decisive victory, after they contributed to the Tories’ unexpected win in last year’s general election. 

Tory adviser Jim Messina – the US data expert who ran Barack Obama’s successful 2012 re-election campaign – uses mass datasets drawn from such disparate sources as store loyalty cards to newspaper subscriptions. These voter profiles are supposed to enable grass roots campaigners to target wavering supporters and those who need persuasion to go and vote.

Leave campaigners said before the referendum that their rivals’ ground war was not well-targeted.

One thing the Tories did not bring from their election triumph was their chief strategist: Sir Lynton Crosby sat this one out. The Remain camp attempted to copy his winning strategy of dire economic warnings and vicious attacks on the opposite side. It backfired. 

Jeremy Corbyn is facing the biggest test of his leadership after two veteran MPs submitted a motion of no-confidence in an attempt to end his tenure at the helm of the Labour party.Read on

One senior backbencher who backed the Leave campaign characterised the Remain camp’s tactics as “smug, sneering, talking down to people” in a political atmosphere in which elites and establishment figures are distrusted.

“There are a lot of people out there who are totally disenfranchised from the political elite and Remain just did not reach them,” he said.

By contrast Mr Cummings came up with a memorable slogan: “take back control”. Vote Leave also successfully undermined the credibility of Remain’s expert supporters and, despite using misleading statistics and fears over immigration, managed to be perceived as the more positive and honest side.

The Conservative Party’s decision to remain officially neutral gave Leave a big boost as it meant that the Remain camp could not use any of the party’s local resources including contact lists of campaigners and voters. 

Before the vote Labour aides proudly extolled the campaign’s reliance on their organisational structure. In retrospect —- particularly given Labour’s failure to mobilise its supporters in last year’s election and the local elections in May — it looks like a gaping hole in the Remain strategy.

Now the leading campaigners for that cause find that they have won — and in doing so they have not only caused an earthquake that rocks the markets, they have also unseated a prime minister who is the first Conservative leader to win an overall majority since 1992. David Cameron’s defeat has produced a dramatic spectacle that ranks with anything we have seen since the fall of Margaret Thatcher.Read on

The political parties ran separate Remain campaigns in addition to the official Stronger In organisation which had cross-party representation. The aim was to avoid having to find a single message that politicians across the spectrum would have to agree on. That had been a problem for the Better Together campaign in the Scottish referendum, with Labour in particular losing support after associating itself too closely with the Tories.

However it undermined the consistency of Remain campaigners’ message. “With a better campaign, this was eminently winnable,” said one person who worked with Remain.

The Leave campaign was ably assisted by the Eurosceptic press. In the final month of the campaign, more than 90m newspapers were published with front pages favouring Leave; only 30m were published with front pages favouring Remain, according to an analysis by Press Gazette. 

Downing Street also complained that the BBC favoured the Leave campaign, for example by presenting its few business supporters as equivalent to the thousands of companies backing Remain.

As the recriminations begin to echo around Westminster, many Remain campaigners are finding it hard to believe that the result they had never felt was in doubt has come to pass.

