Oil prices see biggest weekly decline since early May

2016-06-17

Oil prices rose for the first time in seven trading sessions on Friday as the US dollar eased, but still saw their biggest weekly decline since early May.

Anxiety ahead of the next week’s referendum on UK membership of the EU has unsettled global markets and weighed on riskier assets such as commodities.

Oil has also been hit by concerns that higher prices could boost US production just as supply disruptions ease. Brent, the international oil marker, has rallied 70 per cent since plummeting to a 13-year low of less $30 a barrel in January

Goldman Sachs, one of the most influential banks in commodity markets, this week described that rebound in price as “fragile” and noted several US shale producers had started to speak about completing their backlog of drilled but uncompleted wells.

“Our estimate of the US oil backlog suggests that it represents 500,000 barrels of additional production over the next 18 months,” the bank said in a report.

However, the main factor weighing on oil prices was concern over a possible Brexit. 

Oil price volatility has risen by more than 10 percentage points since the start of June, according to French bank Natixis, as polls have showed an increased probability of a vote to leave.

“In the case of Brexit, we expect oil prices to come under pressure, predominantly through dollar-led moves but also on expectations of an economic slowdown in Europe and its impact on the global economy,” said Natixis analyst Abhishek Deshpande.

Brent could also suffer if the UK is excluded from the Free Trade Agreements the EU has signed with countries such as South Korea.

“These have supported the arbitrage of UK oil out of the region,” said Olivier Jakob of PetroMatrix, a Zug-based consultancy. “That can be described as a bearish risk for Brent, but it is not an immediate risk and therefore one that is difficult to price.”

Helped by a weaker dollar, Brent rose $1.98 to $49.17 a barrel on Friday, but was still down 2.7 per cent over the week. 

West Texas Intermediate, the US oil benchmark, added $1.77 to $47.98, trimming its decline to 2.2 per cent. A weaker greenback makes dollar-denominated commodities cheaper for the holders of other currencies.

In contrast to oil and other commodities, gold had a better week, rising almost 2 per cent. It was supported by Brexit contagion fears and the US Federal Reserve, which kept interest rates on hold at its latest meeting and signalled a slower pace of rises over the next few years. 

The precious metal climbed to its highest level in two years on Thursday, peaking at $1,315 a troy ounce. Gains were pared after campaigning in the referendum was suspended after a member of the UK Parliament was murdered. Gold rose $20.54 to $1,299 on Friday. 

Tom Kendall, analyst at ICBC Standard Bank, said gold could be vulnerable whatever the result of the referendum, including a vote to leave.

“In previous episodes of severe market stress gold has been positively correlated with other assets, at least for a short time, as liquidity dries up, spreads widen and margin calls proliferate,” said Mr Kendall. 

