Airbus seeks to reassure on its UK business

2016-06-24

Airbus, the European aerospace group with major operations in the UK, on Friday sought to calm fears that it could respond to the Brexit vote by swiftly moving some of its British facilities to continental Europe.

Airbus, which makes wings for its passenger jets in Broughton, north Wales, expressed disappointment at the referendum result but said it would “continue to support our workforce and operate our UK facilities”.

Robert Stallard, analyst at RBC Capital Markets, said in the longer term Airbus “may have a tough decision on whether to move its UK operations”.

Before the referendum, Toulouse-based Airbus wrote to its 10,000 plus UK employees and warned that Brexit could threaten the company’s investment plans in Britain.

Airbus, which makes most of its passenger jets at plants spread across France, Germany and the UK, said in April its business model was based on the ability to move products, people and ideas around Europe without restrictions — arrangements that could be undermined by Brexit.

Fabrice Brégier, head of Airbus’s passenger jet division, told the Financial Times in the run-up to the referendum that the company had no plans to quit the UK, but said Brexit would “make life more difficult”.

Airbus said on Friday: “We will study the longer term consequences of this [Brexit] decision on the competitive environment.”

Analysts have in the past highlighted attempts by Germany to secure some of the work done by Airbus in the UK, but on Friday several said the Brexit-induced fall in sterling could serve to make the company’s UK operations more competitive.

While Airbus sells most of its passenger aircraft in US dollars, its costs are mainly in euros and sterling.

Sash Tusa, analyst at Agency Partners, said: “Airbus’s operations in the UK will have an enhanced competitive advantage due to the fall in sterling . . . There may be increased political pressure to move the wings for the next civil aircraft programme to Germany — but this has been a long running issue.

In a letter to UK staff, seven executives spell out their reasons for backing EU membership

“The UK is likely to continue to win due to its very high level of technology and skills.”

Airbus’s shares fell 6 per cent, partly reflecting investor concerns that any economic slowdown stemming from the Brexit vote could reduce demand for air travel.

Airbus is not the only manufacturer that could be vulnerable to disruption in its supply chain following Brexit, either through tariffs or other barriers.

Rolls-Royce, the UK jet engine maker, employs more than 4,500 people in continental Europe, with the majority at facilities in Germany. 

The company said the referendum result was “not the outcome we would have chosen,” but said it will “remain committed to the UK where we have been headquartered for more than a century”.

Fabrice Brégier is increasing passenger jet production, but it is bringing significant challenges

Warren East, Rolls-Royce chief executive, reassured staff there would be no immediate change for British employees based abroad or continental Europeans working in Britain.

The company’s shares rose almost 1 per cent. Rolls-Royce generates two-thirds of its revenue outside the EU.

Shares in BAE Systems, the UK’s largest defence company, fell almost 5 per cent.

Sandy Morris, analyst at Jefferies, said BAE’s limited reliance on the UK for revenue should protect the company from a damaging Brexit effect.

However, he added that serious political upheaval in Britain could hurt BAE’s chances of benefiting from work on a successor to the Trident nuclear submarine.

