Bank shares plunge after Britons vote to leave the EU

2016-06-24

The sell-off in financial stocks has been swift and brutal. Shares in many of Europe’s big banks, insurers and asset managers fell sharply on the news that Britain had voted to leave the EU, raising concerns about the impact on economic growth, jobs, regulation and financial stability.

Among the hardest hit were British banks, including Barclays and Lloyds Banking Group, which fell more than 30 per cent before rebounding slightly to trade down about 20 per cent at lunchtime. More than £20bn was wiped off the market value of the three biggest UK-listed banks in a few hours.

Hours later, shares in US banks followed their transatlantic peers downwards, although not as sharply. Morgan Stanley and Citigroup were the hardest hit soon after the open in New York, down 8.6 per cent and 8.3 per cent respectively. Bank of America, JPMorgan Chase, and Goldman Sachs were also down at least 5 per cent.

The share price collapse — reflecting expectations that economic growth will be hit and the sector will suffer serious disruption — came despite bank bosses’ efforts to reassure their customers and investors that they had things under control. 

The Bank of England insisted it had undertaken “extensive contingency plans”, and would “take all necessary steps” to protect the financial system and the economy.

Yet the worries were not limited to the UK. Shares in the biggest Italian, Spanish, French, Swiss and German banks and insurers all fell by double-digit amounts. The Euro Stoxx banks index was down 17.7 per cent, the lowest level since August 2012. 

Europe and US feel impactBanks across Europe and the US were caught up in the negative reaction to the referendum result 

UK banks hit hardDespite striking drops in Lloyds, Barclays and RBS shares, chiefs lined up to express confidence they would weather the storm

Insurance falls heavilyConcerns about London’s insurance market escalate given its big attraction of passporting rights into the EU

Asset managers reelAberdeen Asset Management dropped 32 per cent while Schroders tumbled 17 per cent and Henderson fell 16 per cent in early trading

Most analysts reckon that because big banks were forced to shore up their capital, funding and liquidity positions since the 2008 crisis, they are now in a much stronger position to withstand such a shock. BoE governor Mark Carney said the capital requirements for big UK banks were 10-times higher than before the crisis.

In the City of London there are widespread fears that thousands of jobs could be lost as banks cut costs in anticipation of a sharp economic slowdown and global investment banks shift resources to continental Europe because of uncertainty over the terms of the UK’s exit from the EU.

JPMorgan Chase warned before the referendum that a vote for Brexit would force it to move 1,000-4,000 of its 16,000 UK staff out of the country. The US bank said on Friday that no staff would be moved for several weeks, until there was more clarity on the negotiations to leave the EU.

Davide Serra, head of bank-focused investment fund Algebris, said: “The UK will have a 6 per cent gross domestic product recession. So it’s very bad. That’s what Italy had — you will be talking about non-performing loans in the UK soon.”

British insurers and asset manager stocks were also hit hard, with many in the insurance industry concerned about the impact of the referendum result on Lloyd’s, London’s insurance market. Asset managers are also worried about their ability to keep “passporting” their products into the EU.

Reporting by Laura Noonan, Harriet Agnew, Emma Dunkley, Martin Arnold, Tobias Buck, Rachel Sanderson, Michael Stothard and James Shotter

