IAG warns on profits as airline shares hit

2016-06-24

The parent of British Airways issued a profit warning just hours after the UK voted to leave the EU, in a move that highlighted the risk that any economic slowdown stemming from Brexit will significantly reduce air travel.

Analysts expressed concerns the UK referendum outcome could hit many European airlines, and also affect certain US carriers.

There are also concerns that Britain’s decision to leave the EU could hurt Heathrow’s status as Europe’s leading hub airport, and damage easyJet’s business model.

International Airlines Group, which owns Heathrow-based BA, Aer Lingus, Iberia and Vueling, said in the run-up to the British referendum it had experienced “a weaker than expected trading environment”.

The group added that “following the outcome of the referendum, and given current market volatility”, it no longer expected to generate a similar increase in operating profit this year compared to that recorded for 2015.

Damian Brewer, analyst at RBC Capital Markets, said airlines “live and die by the economic outlook”, adding the referendum result had “deep implications” for IAG. “We see potential for economic uncertainty, and hence reduced travel demand,” he said.

IAG’s shares closed down more than 22 per cent, while easyJet’s stock fell about 14 per cent.

The plunge in sterling’s value following the Brexit vote highlighted how British travellers face the prospect of more expensive holidays if they fly abroad.

Shares of London-listed travel companies fell. Thomas Cook’s stock dropped almost 16 per cent, while Tui’s shares declined more than 8 per cent. 

“The cost of sunshine just got more expensive,” said Andrew Lobbenberg, analyst at HSBC, adding that continental European airlines could be affected, as well as UK carriers.

“It’s an economic shock across the whole of Europe so some of the continental European airlines will be hurt as well,” he said.

Shares in Air France-KLM dropped almost 10 per cent, while Lufthansa’s stock declined 7 per cent.

The shares of US carriers that have important joint ventures for transatlantic flying also fell.

Shares in American Airlines, which has a partnership with BA, dropped 8 per cent. Shares in Delta Air Lines, which has a joint venture with Virgin Atlantic, declined 6 per cent.

Both American and Delta value how their joint ventures give them good access to Heathrow, which attracts large numbers of business travellers.

But with banks including JPMorgan Chase raising the possibility they could shift some of their UK operations elsewhere following the Brexit vote, there is a risk that London’s status as a leading financial centre could be diminished. That in turn could hurt Heathrow.

Heathrow airport Holdings, parent of the UK’s largest airport, could also be affected by the impending change of prime minister. Boris Johnson, a leading contender to succeed David Cameron as head of the Conservative party, is strongly opposed to adding a third runway at Heathrow.

UK talks with the EU will take up to a decade and could enter ‘a legal and political no man’s land’

EasyJet faces particular complications from the Brexit vote because it has become Europe’s second-largest budget airline by capitalising on the creation of a single EU aviation market in the 1990s.

This market allows all EU airlines to operate services on any routes within the bloc, and easyJet and Ryanair have grown rapidly over the past 20 years through these arrangements.

Carolyn McCall, easyJet’s chief executive and a prominent campaigner for UK membership of the EU, on Friday asked the European Commission to allow British airlines to remain as part of the EU single aviation area.

“We remain confident in the strength of easyJet’s business model . . . We have . . . written to the UK government and the European Commission to ask them to prioritise the UK remaining part of the single EU aviation market, given its importance to trade and consumers,” she said.

