Sterling takes a bumpy round trip over the week

2016-06-17

Five days of heightened volatility ended with sterling in the same territory as it began the week, underlining the hazardous path investors must tread to determine how to trade the UK referendum on EU membership. 

The pound veered from Monday’s week-high of $1.4326 to Thursday’s low of $1.4010, as investors grabbed any crumb of EU referendum news that would influence how next Thursday’s vote will transpire.

Late on Friday the pound was trading at $1.4265, close to unchanged on the week. At £0.7885 versus the euro, the pound was also flat on the week. 

Sterling options surged early in the week, with a retracement from Thursday. The cost of hedging reached nearly 50 per cent for one-week implied volatility, well above levels seen at the 2008 financial crisis.

Sharp downswings were driven by opinion polls showing the Leave camp maintaining a comfortable lead. Sterling’s biggest bounce of the week came in the 20 hours from the mid-afternoon of Thursday during which the pound rose 2 per cent.

This came after both the Leave and Remain camps suspended campaigning as a mark of respect in the wake of the horrific killing at Thursday lunchtime of UK legislator Jo Cox, a much-respected MP and mother of two young children.

Key speeches by UK chancellor George Osborne and Bank of England governor Mark Carney were curtailed. The International Monetary Fund postponed publication of a report on the economic impact of Brexit.

“If next week’s opinions polls indicate that the Leave campaign has sustained its momentum despite the current suspension in campaigning, sterling could see a resumption of downward pressure that is also likely to impact risky assets,” said Jane Foley at Rabobank.

More certain is the extent to which the referendum is now influencing other currencies and markets. Adam Cole, FX strategist at RBC Capital Markets, said publication of opinion polls were likely drivers of price action “of everything from US equity futures to USD/JPY”.

In a week of Brexit caution from several central banks, including the Bank of Japan, the yen climbed 2.6 per cent to ¥104.21. The yen appreciated to ¥103.55 on Thursday, representing it’s firmest level versus the dollar in nearly two years.

Such global impact may not be surprising, given the close correlation of markets to general risk appetite, said Mr Cole.

But it points to a fraught trading climate on June 23-24. In periods of intense news flow, sterling liquidity is likely to be “very challenging”, he said. 

