Big buyouts slow amid Brexit uncertainty

2016-06-20

Big leveraged buyouts in Europe have slowed markedly this year, research has found, as the region’s private equity firms encountered a reluctance to do deals ahead of the UK’s vote on membership of the EU.

Private equity investors have done €25.6bn-worth of deals across the continent so far in 2016 — down from more than €40bn in the same period last year, and nearly half the €48.5bn-worth of deals agreed in the second half of 2015, according to the Centre for Management Buyout Research.

However, the survey — which is sponsored by the British private equity group Equistone and Investec, the bank — found buyout volumes increased in the ‘mid-market’: deals valued at less than €50m.

“The market is cooling off, with the EU Referendum one of a number of challenges currently facing deal-doers,” said John Clifford of Investec. “This has made larger deals more difficult to complete, but we are encouraged to see the lower mid-market persevere — it highlights private equity’s ability to truly invest across all cycles.”

In the year to date, there have been 25 middle-market deals — worth £552m in aggregate — in the UK, which is three more than in the previous six months.

Britain is Europe’s biggest and most mature arena for buyouts, with €7.7bn of deals in the first half, compared with €5.8bn in France, the next largest, because of its deep mid-market.

“There are now a lot of seasoned investors in the UK [middle market] who have been investing year on year for a long time,” Mr Clifford said.

Middle-market deals also use less debt. “You can invest in conservative capital structures that can see you through macro headwinds, if that is what we may be facing,” said Christiian Marriott, a partner at Equistone.

By contrast, bigger buyout deals are more exposed to wider market volatility and can be complex to put together: large buyouts often require up to a year of planning, compared with three to four months for mid-market deals, leaving some investors hesitant to commit to large transactions before the Brexit vote.

————————-

UK’s EU Referendum: How people would vote

For a more detailed summary of opinion polling visit the FT’s Brexit poll tracker page

————————-

CVC’s acquisition of a stake in the RAC, announced last year but completed in 2016, was one of the first half’s few big buyout deals, valuing the British roadside recovery company at £2.2bn including its debt.

Private equity executives, whose investments typically last five years or more, have been closely reading the Lisbon treaty’s Article 50 ‘exit clause’ — which provides for a two-year period before leaving the EU — to work out the practical implications of a British vote to leave.

They have also been bracing for the immediate effects of Brexit on companies that they already own, such as currency fluctuations. Sharp movements in sterling and the euro were “absolutely the front and centre risk,” Mr Marriott said.

