Sterling steadies but caution persists with Yellen ahead

2016-06-21

Sterling is steadier, European stocks, oil and bond yields are all slightly softer as investors display caution ahead of the UK’s EU referendum and await fresh guidance from the Federal Reserve.

The market’s mixed and tentative tone comes after risk assets globally on Monday posted solid gains following polls showing voters in favour of the UK leaving the EU had lost some of their lead over the Remain camp, writes Jamie Chisholm.

Investors in recent weeks have been fearful that a “Brexit” would harm an already weak European economy and potentially trigger further political uncertainty across the region.But the “remain rally” is fading on Tuesday.

The British pound, which surged 2.4 per cent in the previous session, its biggest one-day gain since December 15, 2008, is up just 0.1 per cent to $1.4708 after famed investor George Soros warned sterling could fall sharply in the wake of a “Brexit” vote.Market watchers still think trading in the lead-up to the June 23 referendum will be volatile.

“Until the results of the vote come through late on Thursday, trading will continue to be dominated by the increasingly frequent opinion polls that will appear this week. These tape bombs will diminish liquidity, cause trading spreads to widen and will ensure that risk appetite will remain a function of the political polls. The sooner Thursday comes around the better,” said Sean Keane at Triple T Consulting.

The mood in equities is also more muted. The FTSE 100 is down 0.5 per cent after surging 3 per cent at the start of the week, while the Euro Stoxx 600, which bounced 3.7 per cent, is slipping 0.2 per cent.

Part of the reason for these declines is softness in energy stocks as Brent crude dips 1 per cent to $50.14 a barrel. But traders are also noting that Wall Street finished well off its session highs on Monday.

US index futures, however, suggest the S&P 500 will advance by 6 points to 2,089 as investors turn their attention to Federal Reserve chair Janet Yellen’s semi-annual testimony to Congress in the US later on Tuesday.

Ms Yellen is not expected to deviate markedly from her press conference remarks following the Fed’s decision last week to keep interest rates on hold. However, the outlook for US interest rates is likely to come back into focus should Brexit concerns subside.

“A rebound in [US] payrolls growth in June and a clear UK vote to remain in the EU could yet persuade the Fed to raise rates in late July. At this stage, however, a further short delay until September appears more likely, followed by another rise in December,” reckon analysts at Capital Economics.

US 10-year Treasury yields are down one basis point to 1.66 per cent, while equivalent maturity Bunds, which last week fell into negative territory amid European Central Bank bond buying and “Brexit” worries, are off 1bp to 0.05 per cent.

The US dollar index, a measure of the US currency against a basket of global peers, remains under pressure and is inching down 0.1 per cent to 93.54.

Gold, which is sensitive to US interest rate expectations and which last week hit a 22-month high of $1,315 amid the burgeoning “Brexit” fears, is down $6 to $1,284 an ounce.Earlier in Asia, most bourses followed Europe’s upbeat Monday mood. Japan’s exporter-sensitive Nikkei 225 gained 1.3 per cent after the “haven” yen weakened, now off 0.5 per cent to ¥104.45 per US dollar.

Australia’s S&P/ASX 200 rose 0.3 per cent, Hong Kong’s Hang Seng was up 0.6 per cent but mainland China’s Shanghai Composite slipped 0.3 per cent.

