What will the Bank of England now do after Leave vote?

2016-06-24

As the UK’s momentous decision to exit the EU begins to reverberate through the financial system, Bank of England governor Mark Carney has one overriding objective: stability. 

The BoE’s view that leaving the EU will damage growth and risk pushing the country into recession is unchanged. But now its focus will shift entirely to trying to mitigate the fallout. 

In public, policymakers have been tight-lipped about contingency plans. But behind closed doors, officials have been building on the plans developed for the Scottish independence referendum to agree in advance a playbook on how to respond. 

Communications

The BoE’s first priority is reassurance. It needs to show both the markets — and the British public — that it is still in control. 

Once the result is formally declared and after consultation with the Treasury, Mr Carney will make a statement reaffirming the BoE’s responsibilities for financial stability, regulation and monetary policy — just as the bank would have done in the event of a vote for Scottish independence. 

Keep the money flowing

The BoE previously announced special liquidity auctions around the time of the vote to ensure that British banks do not run short of funds. The aim is to offset any possibility of a run on the banks, or the financial system seizing up, and to prevent a repeat of the chaos seen in the financial crisis. 

The BoE will be monitoring the take-up of these sterling auctions closely, and will launch more if required.

All the big central banks will be in close contact with each other, to guard against spillover to other makers and to discuss whether wider co-ordinated action is needed.

The BoE already has currency swap-lines in place with other central banks — including the European Central Bank and the Federal Reserve. These would essentially allow it to provide liquidity in foreign currencies to banks within its jurisdiction if the normal funding markets dried up. 

Sterling interventions 

As the money that would be spent belongs to the nation, decisions about whether to intervene in the currency markets are the responsibility of the Treasury.

BoE officials could and would give advice but would not act without clear instructions from Westminster. It is highly unlikely that there would be any appetite for fighting the markets in the short term. 

The vote for Britain to leave the EU will have grave consequences

Monetary policy

While the next meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee is not until July 14, the governor could choose to call an earlier meeting at any time. 

It will be a very tricky balancing act for the committee. In the event of a financial shock, the standard response would be to cut rates. For example, in the aftermath of the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the BoE slashed rates by 4.5 percentage points in six months.

But if sterling’s likely slide is sustained, that will cause a sharp jump in the cost of imports, which will feed through to rising inflation. 

In that scenario, interest rate rises would be on the table, both to contain inflation and prevent capital flight.

In the short term, however, the BoE may be tempted not to focus on the risk of higher inflation later, judging that the first priority is to support the economy. 

An additional complication is that with interest rates still at very low levels, it is unclear how much stimulus a further rate cut would provide. The BoE may need to look again at unconventional policy, such as a further expansion of its quantitative easing policy. 

Sectors such as foreign exchange trading have boomed during EU years

Financial stability

The Financial Policy Committee, which has the responsibility of ensuring the resilience of the UK’s financial system, is due to meet next week. It has already highlighted concerns that the uncertainty generated could hit the availability of loans and make them more expensive. 

The Prudential Regulation Authority, which regulates banks, will also be keeping a close eye on stresses and strains in individual operations. Andrew Bailey, its chief, said last month he was having “daily” conversations with Britain’s banks on how they would cope with the immediate fallout. The regulator could take ad hoc decisions to reduce the amount of capital a bank needs to hold on an individual rather than sector-wide basis. 

In the event of a crisis at a financial institution, the BoE could decide whether to provide emergency funding — which would most likely be secret. It would also have the ultimate responsibility of ensuring an orderly windup of any failed organisation. 

Such an event is unlikely, however. It would be the stuff of nightmares for regulators, who have repeatedly argued that Britain’s financial system is much better prepared for shocks than it was before the financial crisis. 

