Gold soars to two-year high as investors run for cover

2016-06-24

Gold soared to a two-year high and oil fell more than 6 per cent after the UK shocked markets by voting to leave the EU and investors searched for safe places to park cash.

The precious metal jumped to a high of $1,358 a troy ounce even as the US dollar — which usually moves counter to gold — moved sharply higher. It later pared some of its gains to trade at $1,328.

“The surging gold price clearly shows the panic sweeping financial markets,” said Adrian Ash, head of research at BullionVault.com, an online brokerage.

“It’s like a bomb’s gone off, particularly after everyone yesterday was taking trades off and banking on a remain.” 

In sterling terms, gold surged more than 20 per cent — its fastest move on record — to almost £1,000 an ounce, as the UK currency dropped to its lowest level in 30 years. The UK will become the first country to leave the EU since its foundation.

Gold is seen as a potential haven from financial market uncertainty and as a hedge against big currency moves. Volumes for gold in China were almost three times higher than normal, according to Ole Hansen, at Saxo Bank.

“The market reaction is also a result of how completely unprepared traders were considering how much a ‘Remain’ vote had been priced in,” said Mr Hansen, adding that oil had been hurt by the strengthening dollar as well as concerns about demand and global economic growth. 

There were a record 286m lots — the equivalent of 143 tonnes — of physical gold traded on the Shanghai Gold Exchange, according to ICBC Standard Bank.

London-based bullion dealer Sharps Pixley said it had seen its busiest day with online sales draining its stocks of larger bullion bars, prompting it to use emergency reserves of gold kilobars from Germany. 

Dollar-denominated commodities typically suffer when the US dollar strengthens because it makes them more expensive for holders of other currencies.

Brent, the international oil marker, dropped $2.71, or 5.3 per cent, to $48.21 a barrel, while on the other side of the Atlantic West Texas Intermediate was down $2.60, or 5.2 per cent, to $47.50.

Energy Aspects, a London-based consultancy, said oil prices were likely to remain volatile given the weakness in physical markets, which have been struggling under the weight of a near two-year glut.

“Brexit will have longer-term implications for oil demand, given expectations that it would slow economic growth in the UK and beyond,” said Amrita Sen, chief analyst at the consultancy. “However, we expect the effects to be relatively modest unless the vote triggers a broader macroeconomic meltdown.”

Friday’s widespread risk aversion also affected industrial metals where there was also heavy trading as the results of the vote came through in the early hours of Friday morning.

Nickel for delivery in three months on the London Metal Exchange dropped almost $400 to $8,825 a tonne, while copper lost 3 per cent to $4,635. 

UK motorists hoping oil’s slide might provide a small boost to their wallets amid the broader financial turmoil are likely to be disappointed, however.

In sterling terms, oil jumped more than 8 per cent because of the move against the dollar.

Cocoa traded in London rallied almost 3 per cent to £2,331 a tonne. The commodity, one of the few raw materials traded equally on both sides of the Atlantic, is denominated in sterling in London and the US dollar in New York. 

The key ingredient for chocolate was one of the few commodities higher in a sea of red, but Jonathan Parkman, co-head of agriculture at Marex Spectron, said: “For the cocoa market generally this development is negative fundamentally.”

