Le Pen seeks mileage from Brexit debate

2016-06-21

Marine Le Pen has seized on the referendum on Britain’s EU membership to request a similar vote in France, as she threw her weight behind the Leave camp in the final stretch of the campaign.

The leader of the French far-right National Front party said that the UK referendum taking place on Thursday was proof that the EU was “decaying”, as she pressed her case for France to leave the bloc.

“I would vote for Brexit, even if I think that France has a thousand more reasons to leave than the UK,” Ms Le Pen said in a televised interview on Tuesday evening. “Because we have the euro and Schengen,” she added, referring to the single currency and the passport-free zone she staunchly opposes.

“Whatever the result, it shows the EU is decaying, that there are cracks everywhere,” she said.

The FN has used the UK debate to push its own plan to renegotiate France’s membership terms and has pledged to hold an in-out referendum if it reaches power after presidential elections next year. 

There is too much to fix to leave Europe to the care of politicians

The anti-immigration and anti-Europe party has vowed to organise a vote six months after winning the presidency. In the months leading up to the French referendum, the party would try to get Brussels to hand “border control, budgetary, legislative and monetary sovereignty” back to France, Ms Le Pen has said. Since Brussels would likely resist this transfer of power to Paris, the FN would then campaign for a “Frexit.”

Ms Le Pen, who is predicted to qualify for the second round of the presidential run-off, had considered travelling to the UK before the referendum to support the Out campaign. But the plans failed to materialise after the Leave camp recoiled.

On Tuesday, Ms Le Pen described the EU as a “totalitarian” institution, that would not allow any of its members to leave. The EU was responsible for high unemployment, low growth and uncontrolled immigration, she claimed. “So let’s get around a table and create a Europe of the nations,” she said.

