Spillover risks boost the case for central banks to co-ordinate

2016-06-22

Calls for international policy co-ordination have often been rejected by policymakers on the grounds that cross-border spillovers are not sufficiently important. Central banks, in particular, argued that their mandate is limited to national objectives and that they are accountable to their countries’ institutions only. This argument has been used in the past, for instance, by the US Federal Reserve, to explain why it could not accommodate calls from emerging markets to avoid implementing an excessively expansionary monetary policy that encouraged excessive capital inflows to these countries and the appreciation of their currencies.

The situation may have changed more recently as the potential for spillover effects increased and the room for manouevre for monetary policy narrowed substantially, with interest rates reaching the zero lower bound, or even becoming negative.

In its recent statements, the Fed indicated that foreign developments, affecting the Chinese economy, Brexit, emerging markets or the eurozone, are becomingly increasingly relevant for its interest rate decisions. The exchange rate of the dollar is viewed as a factor of risk, as an excessive appreciation might slow manufacturing activity down and negatively affect the pace of employment growth. The European Central Bank has repeatedly stated that while the exchange rate is not a policy target, it is nevertheless an important factor influencing its policy objectives. The Bank of Japan is under continued pressure to contain the appreciation of the yen.

With interest rates reaching very low levels, in both the short and long term, the exchange rate has become the main factor in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. This creates the risk of beggar-thy-neighbour policies, aimed at stimulating growth through stronger exports and weaker imports, and thus at the expense of trading partners. Some have called it “currency wars”. A first step to avoid such wars would be for the major central banks to agree not to push interest rates further into negative territory, and avoid a “race to the bottom”. This is certainly useful, but not sufficient. It does not help solve the current dilemma — of the first mover — that the Fed faces.

As the US economy continues to grow and create new jobs, admittedly at a variable pace, while inflation gradually moves closer to target, the rate of interest needs to be raised towards a more “normal” level for this stage of the cycle. Such a move would, however, attract capital flows to the US and push the dollar exchange rate up, thus weakening US competitiveness, hurting exports and slowing the US recovery and the pace of job creation. These potential effects discourage the Fed from raising rates. The turbulence in financial markets and possible adverse developments abroad add to these concerns. In fact, the Fed gradually led markets to revise the expected pace of interest rate rises, from four in 2016 projected a year ago to currently only one (possibly two). This has led to a strengthening of the euro and the yen, putting pressure on the respective central banks to ease further.

The fear of the possible consequences of being the first to move rates up may delay action repeatedly, leading to an excess of global liquidity that may fuel the next crisis.

This is where monetary policy co-ordination might play a role. The Fed could be more inclined to raise US rates if it was reassured that the dollar would nor skyrocket against the other major currencies. Such reassurance could be provided by the other big central banks committing to act in such a way as to counteract excessive exchange rate movements. In practice, this would imply that central banks agree to set exchange rate ranges within which currencies would be free to float, while at the same time being willing to constrain their interest rate policies and possibly implement foreign exchange interventions consistently with such ranges.

The Fed would be reassured that an interest rate rise would not lead to an overshooting of the dollar, which would hurt domestic growth. The other central banks would be reassured that any delay in the Fed’s action would not lead their own currency to jump up, which would push them to take further action in the opposite direction. Initially, the setting of exchange rate ranges could be indicative and not necessarily trigger automatic policy responses, but at least set the stage for discussion and common assessments, that may eventually lead to joint action. This would probably reduce market uncertainty and create a more favourable climate for business decisions at the global level.

Monetary policy continues — unfortunately — to be the only game in town, but with less and less room for manouevre and at risk of losing credibility. Given the increased spillovers and uncertainties, the time may have come for the different towns to start co-ordinating their actions.

Lorenzo Bini Smaghi is a former member of the executive board of the European Central Bank and currently visiting scholar at Harvard’s Weatherhead Center for International Affairs and LUISS School of European Political Economy in Rome

