Head of Japanese business lobby group urges yen intervention

2016-06-20

Japan must intervene to weaken a yen driven up by fear of a British exit from the EU, the chairman of the powerful Keidanren business lobby said.

In an interview with the Financial Times, Sadayuki Sakakibara called on the Japanese authorities to bring order to a currency market that has seen the yen climb as high as ¥104 against the dollar.

The business chief, who speaks for over a thousand Japanese companies employing 140,000 British workers, said he saw “no merit at all” in Brexit.

His remarks show the extent of alarm about turmoil in global markets resulting from a Brexit vote and its impact on Japan and the currency’s haven status. 

They also demonstrate the concern among Japanese businesses about one of their top investment destinations. Mr Sakakibara warned that companies could be forced to adopt a separate EU strategy and leave the UK.

Speaking about the surge in the yen that has seen the Japanese currency hit a 24-month high against sterling, Mr Sakakibara said “a sharp movement like that is not orderly”.

The yen’s recent approach to ¥100 against the dollar has provoked speculation that the Ministry of Finance may be poised to intervene for the first time since 2011.

“We think the time to act has already arrived. It’s already ¥104, ¥105 to the dollar. It was ¥118 in January. From ¥118 to ¥104 — that’s ¥15 in six months,” said Mr Sakakibara.

“That is not orderly. Extremely disorderly is all you can call it. To keep it stable in a reasonable range then certainly the Ministry of Finance should act.”

Saying that Brexit would force a “drastic” change of strategy by Japanese companies, he warned that Britain would lose export competitiveness, forcing some companies to shrink or even close their plants.

“Companies would be forced to adopt an EU strategy and a UK strategy,” said Mr Sakakibara. “In concrete terms, there would be companies that would scale back the scope and size of their operations.”

He added that most Japanese companies have their European headquarters in London and that, in the event of Brexit, some would probably move to Düsseldorf, Brussels or Frankfurt.

Mr Sakakibara, former chief of carbon-fibre maker Toray, is the voice of most of Japan’s main exporters, and a powerful political figure who is close to prime minister Shinzo Abe.

Once scaleable mountain looks suddenly threatening in the event of Brexit vote

Brexit is dominating conversation in Japanese business and politics, Mr Sakakibara said. He explained that membership of the EU and access to its market of 500m was the “basic premise” of Japanese investment.

“If that premise collapses then the game is totally changed,” he said. “Even if the UK had various incentives, its attractiveness and competitiveness as an investment destination would plummet.”

Japanese companies have been reluctant to state their true feelings, for fear of alienating British customers, but Mr Sakakibara’s remarks show their overwhelming belief that Brexit would be bad for Britain and Japan.

In addition to the currency and economic impacts, Mr Sakakibara pointed to negotiations on a Japan-EU free trade agreement, which the two sides aim to complete this year.

He said the UK was its biggest backer and France its biggest opponent. “If the UK were to leave, therefore, then even the trade negotiations would suffer a severe blow,” said Mr Sakakibara.

