Gold sparkles at two-year high as Fed stays cautious

2016-06-16

Gold prices scaled the highest level in two years on Thursday, topping $1,300 an ounce, after the US Federal Reserve signalled a slower pace of rate rises over the next few years and Brexit fears intensified.

The precious metal has been lifted by safe haven flows ahead of the UK’s June 23 referendum on European Union membership, which investors fear will trigger ructions in financial markets should Britain choose to leave.

A cautious tone struck by the Fed, as it kept rates on hold on Wednesday, acknowledged the slowing job creation in the US and rising international risks, including Brexit. The Fed also revised down forecasts for how quickly it will raise interest rates in 2017 and 2018. 

“The market remains well supported in a climate of extremely low yields, concerns about the global economy and an increasingly dovish Fed,” said David Govett, head of Precious Metals at Marex Spectron.

Gold climbed as high as $1,314.87 a troy ounce, up 2.1 per cent and the highest since August 2014, before easing back to $1,312. 57 late in London.

Miners of the yellow metal were among the biggest risers on the all FTSE index. Shares in Centamin increased almost 8 per cent in early morning trading, while Randgold Resources rebounded 4 per cent and Petropavlovsk rose 3.6 per cent.

The precious metal has been one of the best performing commodities in 2016, rallying 25 per cent as economic uncertainty has put the Fed off raising rates again and prompted other central banks to hold rates.

Gold, which offers no yield to investors, is on course for its first year of gains in four. The precious metal hit an all-time peak near $1,920 a troy ounce in 2011, before slumping to $1,045 at the end of last year.

Shares spike as price of shiny yellow metal hits two-year high, writes Kate Burgess.

Analysts said fears of the UK voting for Brexit were providing a boost to gold, but emphasised that recent buying has been broad-based. 

Assets in gold-backed exchange traded funds have hit the highest level since 2013, rising to 52.7m ounces, while funds increased their net long position — the difference between bets on higher and lower prices — by 20 per cent last week after three weeks of selling. 

Ole Hansen, head of Commodity Strategy, Saxo Bank, said funds started buying again after a “surprisingly weak” US jobs report at the beginning of the month, but also saw a vote for Brexit as supportive.

“A vote to leave the European Union would almost ensure a prolonged period of uncertainty and risk adversity where stocks would suffer and bonds continue to be in demand,” he said. “While it may also support the US dollar we see an increased risk that it could help propel gold back towards $1400, the 2014 high.”

But even if the UK does vote to remain at next week’s referendum, traders and analysts believe gold would not suffer too much. 

“Should Brexit not take place then the price of gold would mildly come off as the main driver has been the US,” said analysts at Natixis.

