Brexit anxiety spreads from the City to homes and schools

2016-06-22

Psychologists and therapists working in the City have reported the emergence of Brexit anxiety in recent weeks.

Dr Michael Sinclair of the City Psychology Group says many of the bankers he sees are preoccupied with managing the extra risk in the build-up to the referendum on EU membership. 

“Some clients have said they are trading frantically, others report they’re extremely busy moving investments around while dealing with uneasy and frustrated clients,” he says.

Political and business uncertainty had created additional work stress and a void filled with fears for the future. “There’s a threat of redundancy looming,” says Dr Sinclair. “It’s evidently a complex situation with lots of unknowns and where there is uncertainty there is inevitably anxiety.”

Dr Sinclair’s observations resonate with Eva Kurz, a former Magic Circle lawyer and banker turned therapist in Belsize Park, north London. This week one of her clients said anxiety about a British exit was reaching the playground at their child’s London school. Ms Kurz says 12-year-olds are concerned their parents will lose their jobs and they might have to move. “It was surprising that anxiety was spreading to the children.”

Others report that Brexit anxiety has been a particularly difficult for EU nationals born outside the UK. Karin Sieger, a psychotherapist in Richmond, west London, says Brexit has come up among those who feel settled with work and family commitments. “It stands to reason that the heating up of the debate, lack of clarity on both sides about implications and implementation is causing great uncertainty and worry,” she says.

Punam Birly, head of legal services for employment and immigration at KPMG, the professional services firm, says: “We have found that some of our EU national staff in particular have been anxious about the impact of a vote which could change the course of their career and personal lives. This is a vote in which they are not taking part, which may add to a feeling of helplessness.” 

One employee told Ms Birly the uncertainty was making them anxious even though they understood they may be able to stay in the UK permanently. 

This apprehension is shared by UK staff. Supported by the firm’s mental health network, the executive team developed an internal portal to provide employees with information on the referendum. “We have found that keeping colleagues informed . . . reduces the risk of increased anxiety levels,” she says.

A French national in her team confided that even if the vote is to remain they are questioning their future in a country that appeared hostile to EU nationals. 

Xenophobic language in the campaign has caused distress among some of Ms Kurz’s clients. “Betrayal” is a word that has come up in sessions with UK clients, she says, particularly among those in their 20s and 30s. Division within families, particularly between older and younger generations, has also caused distress. 

Clients who considered membership a given feel rocked by the looming threat that it could be taken away. “It is a fear about exclusion and being kicked out of a club,” Ms Kurz adds.

————————-

UK’s EU referendum: full coverage and analysis

View the FT’s comprehensive guide to the vote on whether Britain should stay in Europe, with all the latest news, analysis and commentary from both sides of the debate. See more 

————————-

