Falling bond yields — a moving message

2016-06-17

A strange aspect of the financial system is how the question that may matter most to investors around the globe is one of the most deceptively familiar: what do falling bond yields mean? 

Asked 30 years ago, when the annual income from a 10-year Treasury had dropped from 14 per cent to 7 per cent, falling yields represented victory over destabilising inflation. 

As the coupon on government bonds is set at issue, inflation is the enemy of so-called fixed-income investors: over time it eats away at a bond’s value. Higher interest rates mean lower bond prices and vice versa. 

In the 1990s falling yields meant that investors, so-called “bond market vigilantes”, approved of policies that produced steady growth and subdued inflation. A decade later falling interest rates were first a response to economic shocks — a burst technology stock bubble and the 9/11 terrorist attacks — then a sign of “great moderation” that ended in a crisis of bad debts. 

Two years ago it started to become clear negative interest rates might be more than a rare quirk of markets, where an investor pays more for a bond than they will get back in interest and repayment of principal. 

Falling yields had become a sign of extraordinary efforts by central banks to stimulate growth and inflation. By suppressing borrowing costs for governments, the hope is it becomes easier for businesses and individuals to borrow, invest and spend.

This week the yield on the 10-year Bund, a benchmark against which borrowing costs across Europe are compared, dipped below zero for the first time. On Thursday the entire market for Swiss bonds maturing before 2049 was submerged. A 10-year Treasury offered an annual income of as little as 1.55 per cent, the lowest level since late 2012.

It followed a downbeat assessment of US prospects in the years ahead by the Federal Reserve. Janet Yellen, Fed chair, acknowledged at a press conference that the level where official interest rates are neutral for the US economy is “quite depressed” by historical standards. 

In the language of the market, where hawks are always poised to raise interest rates to fight inflation, doves to offer help for the economy, the implication was clear: “The message Janet Yellen gave this week was possibly even more dovish than expected”, says David Brown at New York-based investment house Neuberger Berman. “Falling rates are reflective of that and the distortions created by various central bank activities around the world.”

The central banks of Japan and Europe have set short-term interest rates below zero, as well as purchasing bonds to push down yields for debt maturing years into the future. This has arguably created a shortage of “safe assets”, those where repayment is reliable and inflation and the overall level of interest rates the main risks buyers face. 

Life insurers in particular must buy long-dated government bonds to match long-term liabilities to policyholders making regular payments. “They end up buying sovereign and corporate debt even at very low yields because they’ve got to put the money to work,” says Patrick Liedtke, head of BlackRock’s insurance business in Europe. 

The desire for some form of reliable income has forced buyers towards bonds maturing ever further into the future, pushing down yields, and so boosting demand for even longer dated bonds. Such investments will rapidly lose value were interest rates to rise, but assumptions that inflation will remain muted for years, possibly decades, has made some buyers comfortable taking longer term bets on corporate and sovereign credit risks.

In turn, this has encouraged governments in Europe and the US to extend the lifespan of outstanding sovereign debt through sales of 30, 50 and even 100-year maturities. Strategists at Goldman Sachs predict the average maturity of eurozone government debt sold via syndication will jump from 15 years in 2015 to 25 years by the end of 2016. 

10-year Bund positive again, equities indices in London, Frankfurt and Tokyo rise 

Sales of half-century bonds remain a mostly European phenomenon, and sales by France, Belgium and Spain this year have been heavily oversubscribed at issue and remain in demand in secondary markets, sending France’s 50-year borrowing rate down from 2 per cent in late April to 1.53 per cent.

“The number of investors holding this sort of long-dated debt is relatively small, but it’s clear that they, along with everyone else, are prepared for a low-growth, low-inflation world,” says ABN Amro fixed-income strategist Kim Liu. 

Some insurers have been tempted to buy for fear of even lower yields tomorrow. “To avoid negative yield and when they think rates will fall, they buy longer dated paper,” says Mr Liedtke.

However, not every insurer agrees. The chief investment officer at one large European group says any yield below 1 per cent would be too low to match liabilities. For them, falling bond yields mean a business model under threat.

The final question, however, is does the level of bond yields matter when politics is the threat and safety is prized? Charlie Diebel, head of rates for Aviva Investors, saw fear in moves this week. “The market is clearly repricing the shift in the perceived odds with respect to Brexit,” he says. 

