Brexit fears turn Mexico into new EM whipping boy

2016-06-22

Mexico peso traders: get your tin hats ready for the Brexit bombardment.

The peso – already a favourite proxy for traders, has long been a lightning rod for risks because it is the most liquid currency in the emerging world, with $135bn changing hands daily and trading 24 hours a day. Now it has moved into step with sterling in recent days as traders short the peso to mitigate the fallout from a “leave” vote in the UK’s referendum on EU membership tomorrow, writes Jude Webber in Mexico City

Mexico’s economy is dependent on that of the US and the UK has little direct impact, suggesting that most of the correlation between the two currencies – see the graph below – is down to Brexit jitters.

“As the vote date approached, correlations between the peso and the pound have risen markedly,” said Mike Moran, head of Americas Macro research at Standard Chartered Bank in New York.

“CFTC data also shows peso short positioning from leveraged accounts risen to a two year high, making it probably the most crowded trade among other LatAm currencies,” he added. “Short covering risks in the event of a remain victory could be sharp.”

If Britain votes ‘leave’

The peso, which has dropped 20 per cent against the US dollar in the past 12 months and 7 per cent since January, has already earned the dubious distinction as the second worst-performing major emerging market currency so far this year. A ‘leave’ vote will only make things worse.

“We could see the peso leap to 19.7 to the dollar quite quickly in the short term and 20 in the first quarter of 2017 if there’s a ‘leave’ vote,” says Marco Oviedo, chief economist at Barclays in Mexico.

Enrique Covarrubias, head of strategy, fixed income and economics at Actinver in Mexico, reckons Brexit would mean an exchange rate of “at least 20” pesos to the dollar – despite Mexico’s sound economic fundamentals and modest growth.

Or as analysts at Société Génerale said in a note: “We consider the Mexican peso MXN as the most vulnerable in LatAm to a flare-up in global macro risks.”

What if the vote is ‘remain’?

Some analysts believe the peso could recover to around 17.5 to the dollar if there is a clear-cut ‘remain’ vote – about the level seen in April when polls were predicting the UK would stay in Europe.

But if a Leave vote does emerge, many also expect the central bank – known as Banxico – to make good on its warnings to support the currency, either through discretionary intervention or a direct rate hike.

Guillermo Aboumrad, director of market strategy at Finamex in Mexico, sees a half-point rise if the ballot result is ‘leave’. But even without Brexit, a fragile US manufacturing sector, which is highly intertwined with Mexico’s economy, continued low world growth, and concerns about rising Mexican debt and the risks posed by a liquidity crisis at state oil company, Pemex, should prompt a 25bp hike, he says.

Back in February, with the peso at 19.17 to the dollar, Banxico made a surprise 50-point hike at an extraordinary, off-calendar meeting. Analysts see no such move this time, Brexit or no. But some, like Dolores Ramón at Ve Por Más in Mexico, see intervention to stabilise the currency after an ‘out’ vote, and no hike on June 30, on the grounds that the Fed could delay its hike and so Banxico may wait as well.

But buckle up for more volatility, whatever happens

Even if Brexit is averted, the peso remains vulnerable to volatility, first from the timing of the next Fed hike, but above all from the Donald Trump factor in the US presidential race. The Republican contender’s protectionist stance, including a border wall, would spell disaster for Mexico, which sends 80 per cent of its exports to the US and whose economy is intimately entwined with that of its neighbour.

And in any case, as Mr Aboumrad notes, Mexico’s peso is more sensitive to bad than to good news – when things go well, its rises are not as pronounced as its drops on bad news. In other words, it’s not just about external factors, especially if volatility and a weak exchange rate began to undermine consumer confidence – currently Mexico’s main motor of growth.

