Civil service given green light to prepare for Brexit

2016-06-24

Michael Gove gave the civil service the green light to begin preparations for a Brexit on Friday. 

But there were immediate questions over the future of Sir Jeremy Heywood, cabinet secretary, who was a subject of vitriolic criticism in the run-up to the referendum. 

The cabinet office rejected suggestions that Sir Jeremy might step down. It added: “As you would expect all permanent secretaries and departments will be involved in carrying forward the decision of the British people in the EU referendum.”

But many Brexit supporters are suspicious about what is seen as an entrenched pro-European culture in Whitehall.

One insider said the explanation lay in officials’ close contact with European counterparts which, he argued, leaves them better placed than most to understand how the UK benefits from EU membership. 

Some officials are believed to have pushed for secondment to the Remain campaign and had to be reminded by their bosses that such a move would violate civil service neutrality.

In recent weeks, several senior civil servants privately mooted stepping down from their posts if the nation backed Brexit, believing they could not conscientiously serve a Eurosceptic government.

Julian McCrae, deputy director of the Institute for Government, said that the civil service was based on the notion that it was there to serve any government. “You do not rise to senior positions within it unless you are prepared to do that,” he wrote in a blog for the IfG. 

But he warned that many on the Leave side had expressed doubts about the role that the civil service had played.

Sir Jeremy has attracted particular vitriol in some quarters. Quentin Letts, a columnist for the pro-Brexit Daily Mail, lambasted the cabinet secretary for allowing David Cameron “to instruct Whitehall to blow more than £9m of taxpayers’ money on sending pro-EU propaganda leaflets to every household”.

————————-

FT Post-Referendum BriefingWhat next?

FT journalists will be discussing what’s next for Britain and the EU, on Monday June 27, in London. Find more details here.

————————-

It was “hard to see how he can properly stay in his post”, added Mr Letts. 

Even admirers feel that, after serving three prime ministers and a deputy prime minister, spanning all three main parties, in a distinguished Whitehall career, Sir Jeremy may see the departure of Mr Cameron as a natural moment to move on. Under that scenario, he could still stay long enough to oversee the transition.

Among civil servants who may emerge as leading figures in the next administration are Chris Wormald, who served as permanent secretary at the department for education when it was headed by Mr Gove.

This story has been updated since original publication

