‘Something very bad has happened’

2016-06-24

Investors were on Friday struggling to come to terms with one of their worst fears after one of the world’s largest economies and financial centres cut itself adrift from Europe and sent global markets into freefall.

Markets faced their steepest losses since the height of the global financial crisis, sterling spiralled to its lowest level in three decades and the FTSE 100 opened 8 per cent lower, as investors were forced to contemplate fundamental economic changes for Britain, Europe and the world. 

Previously hypothetical questions about the future of the UK were suddenly a reality. Could Britain retain its status as a safe haven? How deep would the economic downturn become — and would it spread? And what could central bankers do to prevent chaos? 

As the pandemonium unfolded, it became clear that many traders had been left complacent by opinion polls indicating that UK voters would side with the status quo. Bankers, brokers and investors scrambled to limit losses as trillions of pounds, yen and dollars changed hands in a rush for the havens of gold and government bonds. 

The first indication that Britain was cutting itself away from its trading partner and ally came just after midnight, when it was announced that a large majority in Sunderland, a working-class town in the north of England, had voted to leave the EU. 

On the other side of the world, the head of one of Tokyo’s largest foreign exchange trading desks had been discussing the polls on the phone when he suddenly paused. “Something very bad has happened . . .” he said, and hung up. 

Within minutes the yen had jumped more than 2 per cent in value against the dollar, something almost unheard of in such a short space of time, and the pound crashed from $1.485 to $1.4295. Had it stopped there, the move would have still been the third largest in history, but the fall was just the beginning. Jitters spread around a world waiting anxiously for information from all corners of the UK. 

How major assets moved through the day 

At 2am the Chinese pushed up the gold price, before high-frequency traders kicked in, propelling the volume of gold futures traded in New York to around seven times their normal level. 

Not everyone was preoccupied with disaster. Stock markets in Tokyo and Hong Kong had opened higher — until shares in UK-connected heavyweight companies such as HSBC, Standard Chartered and Li Ka-shing’s flagship CK Hutchison began to plummet. 

By 4am sterling had passed $1.35, breaking records set during the 2008 financial crisis and another day of European rejection: the UK departure from the European Exchange Rate Mechanism in 1992. 

At 6am Jim Leaviss and a fellow portfolio manager for M&G Investments were in a taxi heading in to their London office. “We were just looking at our phones, shaking our heads in disbelief,” he said. 

Like many investors Mr Leaviss was contemplating when the Bank of England, which has held base rates at a steady half per cent for the past eight years, would take action. Another question on investors’ minds was UK debt, long considered one of the safest assets in the financial system, alongside US Treasuries and German Bunds.

Prices for such bonds rise in moments of crisis, pushing the yield down. In Europe, the yield on the Bunds dropped to a record low of minus 0.17 per cent and US Treasury yields fell 20 basis points. 

We were just looking at our phones, shaking our heads in disbelief

Moritz Kraemer, chief ratings officer for Standard & Poor’s, had just became one of the first outside authorities to act on the consequences of the vote. He told the Financial Times that the UK would lose its prized credit rating, the highest available. “We think a AAA-rating is untenable under the circumstances,” he said.

Sterling, meanwhile, continued to fall. At the London offices of broker ICAP a ding sounds after an electronic trade. It went off every 30 seconds.

The clearest sign of chaos was the cost to buy or sell foreign exchange, 500-times the tiny sum normally paid. “People are just coming in when they have to. It’s all order driven,” said one broker. “People were all like —” said one broker, miming eyes on stalks and mouth agape. “People are shocked at the outcome.”

Frits Vogels, head of European, Middle Eastern and African broking at ICAP, said it “was a little akin to markets in the aftermath of Lehman Brothers”. 

At 8am some of those fears were laid to rest. 

“In a few seconds it was obvious that in spite of the vote, UK government bonds were still seen as one of the world’s haven assets,” said Mr Wraith. “But it was also clear that gilts were pricing in an elevated risk of recession.” 

By 8.06am the yield on a 10-year gilt had dropped 36 basis points to a record low of 1.01 per cent, a huge move in a market used to single basis point fluctuations.

Other investors preferred to seek safety in gold. Ross Norman, head of Sharps Pixley, one of London’s oldest gold dealers, said he had called colleagues in Germany to request the transfer of emergency reserves of gold bars. “We have seen our busiest day ever, with online sales draining stocks of our larger bullion bars,” he said. 

At BlackRock, the world’s largest asset manager, chief investment strategist Ewen Cameron Watt was attempting to reassure clients alarmed by tumbling stock prices across Europe. He told them markets had overreacted in the short term. “They need to find a balance between buyer and seller. The early morning trades were about trying to find that level and we may see the price action change over a longer timeframe.”

As the day wore on, the prime minister resigned, the Bank of England indicated that it was prepared to support banks — and some of the larger market moves were tempered. Shares in gold miners and pharmaceuticals, companies that conduct sales in US dollars, were in demand as investors searched for those who might thrive from Brexit. In fact the FTSE 100 ended the week 2 per cent higher than it began.

Jason Manketo, an equity capital markets partner at Linklaters, also found reason to be upbeat: “As a client observed this morning, the earth is still spinning and the sun still rose, and we have to get on with our business.”

Worst hit were the European banks at the heart of previous crises, where share prices sank to their lowest level in four years. 

Theo Phanos of Capeview Capital said the markets had calmed down significantly. “We could have had a stock market crash today, and for the UK banks and the property related stocks, it is close to one. Banks are a levered bet on the economy, and this economy may be heading into recession.” 

As a client observed this morning, the earth is still spinning and the sun still rose, and we have to get on with our business

With elections in Spain on Sunday, the US in November, and France and Germany next year, he offered a downbeat assessment. “Populism means less globalisation, more tariffs, more blocks to the international system, less trade, less investment,” he said.

There are also deeper questions about what lies ahead for investors. If the once-unthinkable Brexit is now a reality, then the question becomes what else might come to pass. “Is this the beginning of the fundamental European short — the break-up of the European Union?” asked Chirantan Barua, an analyst at Bernstein. 

Additional reporting by Leo Lewis in Tokyo, Philip Stafford, Emiko Terazono, Elaine Moore, Thomas Hale and Gavin Jackson in London

