Who is likely to replace David Cameron as prime minister?

2016-06-24

Now that David Cameron has announced he will resign as prime minister, his badly split Conservative party faces a potentially divisive leadership contest — one that will take months to resolve.

Standing outside 10 Downing Street after his failure to persuade the British electorate against voting to leave the EU, Mr Cameron talked of having a successor installed by the time of the Conservative party conference in October. 

He is set to remain as a lame duck prime minister over the summer months, contending with whatever political, financial, constitutional and diplomatic aftershocks British voters’ decisions may now cause.

Graham Brady, chairman of the backbench 1922 committee, will act as the returning officer in the contest the prime minister’s intended resignation now triggers.

Candidates must apply to Mr Brady for inclusion in the contest. MPs then reduce the selection to just two, whose names are put forward for Conservative party members across the country to vote on.

The form of this voting system will shape the outcome. Aspiring Tory leaders must win sufficient support among their Parliamentary colleagues before they have a chance to face the party’s grass roots.

Former London mayor Boris Johnson is the bookies’ favourite to walk into Downing Street as Britain’s next prime minister, though the Tories’ leadership system could prove tricky for him.

Although he is extremely popular among the Tory grass roots, his eight years in City Hall meant he has had little time to build a network of supporters in Westminster.

“Boris doesn’t like it here, and MPs know it,” one Tory backbencher said. “He lacks support among MPs.”

However, his bold decision to back a British exit from the EU brought him a substantial following among Eurosceptic MPs at Westminster, which could tilt the balance. “They owe Boris big time,” one MP said.

Another possibility is the emergence of a “new generation” leader. The Conservatives rarely elect the obvious frontrunner as their leader. Mr Cameron and several of his predecessors were the insurgent, long-shot chances.

Politicians who could become the unexpected winner in this race include Dominic Raab, justice minister, who was widely seen to have performed well for the Leave side in the referendum campaign, and Stephen Crabb, the young work and pensions secretary.

