Sombre spirits displace Welsh Brexiters’ elation

2016-06-17

On Wednesday night, a few dozen of the UK Independence party’s most devoted supporters in south Wales gathered in a small-town pub to toast what they saw as a certain victory in next week’s referendum: a vote to leave the EU, and a triumph after years of toil in unfriendly terrain.

But by Friday morning, after the killing of Labour MP Jo Cox in northern England — shot and stabbed by a man some witnesses claim shouted “put Britain first” — the ebullience of that night seemed long past. 

“I really hope it doesn’t have a negative effect [on the Leave campaign] but without a doubt it has changed the mood,” Nathan Gill, Ukip’s leader in Wales, said of the killing. “I think everyone wants to be more sombre.”

While there was universal revulsion at the killing, how it will affect the campaign across the UK and in Wales remains unclear. Some in the region view it as the isolated work of a madman, unlikely to alter deeply held convictions on the UK’s relationship with Europe.

“The long-term for me is that I think we should be out of Europe, and this won’t change that,” said Sue Boucher, a Ukip campaigner.

Mike Mills, a chocolatier whose heart wants to leave the EU but has decided to go with his head and remain, agreed. “It’s horrible,” he said of the attack on the MP. “[But] it certainly won’t sway my opinion.”

For others the tragedy gave an emotional charge to a case for Remain that until now rested largely on warnings of the economic cost of exit. 

Gareth Jones, founder of the Welsh Innovation Centre for Enterprise, a small-business incubator, suggested Cox’s killing would prompt some voters to turn against the Leave campaign.

“There seems to be a change of heart for a lot of people who didn’t realise exactly which crowd they were following,” he said, depicting the Leave camp as using fear and threats to make its case.

Jane Oriel, a personal assistant in Caerphilly, south Wales, agreed. “I don’t like the divisiveness the Leave campaign has used as their calling card.” she said, adding that the Cox killing “might stop people in their tracks”.

The neck-and neck contest in Wales for the June 23 vote on EU membership was already a fraught one.

Labour still dominates in a region where the traditional coalmining industry is virtually extinct, winning most Welsh seats in 38 of the past 39 elections. But, as in the rusted industrial hubs of the north of England, Ukip has made inroads, scoring 22 per cent of the vote in three southeastern counties in elections last month. Droves of working-class voters appear poised to break with the Labour machine and support a Leave vote in the referendum. While Leave signs have carpeted the valley, and volunteers have been out in force, Remain and its Labour sponsors are seemingly invisible.

“It’s not Ukip — it’s beyond that. It’s right the way across the political spectrum,” said Andy Butcher, 49, a long-time Labour voter and one of a group waving placards in Caerphilly as drivers honked their horns in support.

Wayne David, Caerphilly’s Labour MP, acknowledged there was “little enthusiasm” for the EU despite its funding for the region.

 “I don’t think at the end of the day it’s an issue of ideology,” he said. “It’s an issue of identity. It’s in part an issue of engaging with the modern world.”

Ms Boucher, who is 53 years old, grew up in a Labour household at a time when jobs were so plentiful that workers were bussed into the valleys. Support for Labour, she said, “was a given”.

But in 1991, six weeks after her son was born, her husband lost his job at the Pilkington auto glass factory. Her father and father-in-law also lost jobs. “When it got tough here, it was really tough,” she said. “We were literally on the bones of our arse.”

She eventually gravitated to Ukip after hearing its leader, Nigel Farage, speak and went on to stand unsuccessfully in last year’s general election.

Other party workers in Wales have been battling against the EU for far longer. On Wednesday night, at the King’s Head tavern in the old market town of Usk, Hugh Moelwyn Hughes, Ukip’s first member in Wales, recalled the 289 votes he won when he first stood for the party in the constituency of Islwyn in 1995. “It rained for three months. It was the most depressing period of my life,” he said. 

In a series of speeches, other party leaders recounted the abuse heaped on them over the years and the stacks of leaflets they had handed out — seemingly to no effect. Until the past few weeks.

“We’re here. We’ve got it. This is our moment!” Mr Gill exulted in the pub. “We speak for the people. We genuinely do.”

Two days later, he depicted Cox’s death as a tragic but isolated event. “It was really nothing to do with the Brexit campaign; it was all to do with a madman,” he said.

But after some reflection, he acknowledged that the tragedy might affect a closely balanced race that may be decided by a handful of undecided voters. “How many of them will be swayed by the news cycle?” he asked. “I have no idea.”

