Brexit music (for a film)

2016-06-23

A loss of momentum for the Leave campaign in the UK’s EU membership referendum has helped the British pound climb to its highest level this year. But sterling’s path – and that of UK stocks – over the past month has been much rockier than other markets endured in the run up to major political decisions.

The pound and the FTSE 100 are now sitting roughly flat compared to where they were 20 trading sessions ago i.e. four trading weeks, roughly a month. But market movements since that point have been particularly volatile, writes Peter Wells.

The charts below take a look at some of the major votes and political decisions that have taken place over the past few years: the US fiscal cliff standoff in January 2013, Scotland’s independence referendum in 2014, and Greece’s referendum last summer over accepting its bailout conditions.

Granted, it’s a small sample size and it’s likely in these cases markets had many months to prepare.

And it’s also true there have been other factors – namely the outlook for US monetary policy, a surging yen, and slowing global growth – that investors have been contending with of late.

But when comparing Brexit to events of similar political tail risk, it’s clear the pound and the FTSE 100 have suffered a lot more in the lead-up to polling day than other markets around previous political flashpoints.

There are always difficulties matching events as they seldom compare perfectly. Greece’s woes had been rumbling on for so long, investors might have been forgiven for having fatigue by the time of last year’s referendum. In the case of Scotland, it was a bit of a sideshow for global markets outside the UK. And for the US, the issue surrounding the fiscal cliff has not been definitively resolved – markets just started paying less attention to it after each Band-aid solution.

The main question now is ‘what next?’ In the above examples, other currencies were pretty stable in the month that followed, while stocks took off in Europe and the US. UK equities sank after the Scottish independence vote. But in all cases, these were all the “best” outcomes for investors with major disasters averted on all counts.

Should Brits vote today to leave the EU, there’s agreement among analysts the pound will take a tumble and UK stocks will go along with it. Global markets would almost certainly sell off too as the departure of the EU’s third largest economy from the bloc is simply an unknown.

