Yen breaks through ¥104 after Bank of Japan holds rates

2016-06-16

The yen surged through ¥104 to the dollar after the Bank of Japan kept monetary policy on hold as uncertainty about Brexit trounced signs of falling inflation at home.

“Britain’s referendum on the EU is shaking markets,” said BoJ governor Haruhiko Kuroda in a press conference, blaming a plunge in Japanese 10-year bond yields to minus 0.197 per cent on uncertainty due to Brexit.

The decision makes the BoJ the second major central bank after the US Federal Reserve, which also opted to keep rates unchanged this week, to choose caution in the face of overseas hazards.

In Japan the dilemma is made sharper still as global economic uncertainty has buoyed the yen, a traditional safe asset, which the BoJ has relied on weakening as it strives to escape two decades of on and off deflation.

Strength in the yen hampers Japan’s vital export sector, raising the prospect of renewed verbal intervention by the Ministry of Finance in the weeks ahead.

The yen slipped back slightly to trade down more than 1.7 per cent at ¥104.15 against the dollar. The broad Topix stock index was off more than 2.8 per cent at 1,241.

By a majority of 7-2, the BoJ voted to keep interest rates at minus 0.1 per cent. It will keep buying assets at a pace of ¥80tn a year.

The central bank’s outlook suggests it could yet ease policy next month, after Britain has decided whether to stay in the EU, and Japan has voted in upper house elections due on July 10.

A sharp inflation slowdown since the new financial year began in April has put the BoJ under pressure to ease policy further as it battles to sustain public confidence in its policy.

Official data show the BoJ’s preferred measure of core inflation weakened to 0.9 per cent in April, from 1.1 per cent, while a daily price index published by a start-up called Nowcast suggests the decline accelerated in May.

But a range of tactical considerations — most importantly the Brexit referendum — made it hard for the BoJ to move this month.

“In consultation with domestic and international authorities, we’re keeping a close watch on how it affects the Japanese and global economy,” Mr Kuroda said.

The global flight to safe assets has driven yields on Japanese government bonds to record lows so BoJ easing this month might have had little additional effect.

If Britain votes to leave the EU next week, meanwhile, the yen could rise anyway. That would fuel a public perception that BoJ policy is ineffective — the last thing the BoJ wants to do.

“A rise in volatility or a rise in the yen that doesn’t reflect economic fundamentals would be undesirable so we’re closely watching movements in international markets, including the exchange rate,” said Mr Kuroda.

He pushed back against criticism of the BoJ’s move to negative interest rates in January, saying they have led to cheaper mortgages and business loans, which will boost the economy in due course.

“In no way have minus interest rates had a big effect on the profits of financial institutions or damaged their function of financial intermediation,” Mr Kuroda said, pointing to strong bank profits in the year to March.

He promised to keep monitoring the impact on banks, but called Bank of Tokyo Mitsubishi UFJ’s decision to quit as a primary dealer in Japanese government bonds — widely seen as a protest against negative rates — “a decision by an individual bank”.

Mr Kuroda’s remarks suggest he is eager to soothe public concerns about negative rates, keeping open the option of more rate cuts in the future.

