Lawyers prepare for Brexit bonanza

2016-06-24

City law firms are preparing for a bonanza as clients seek guidance on the complex legal implications of Brexit.

Dechert, Simmons & Simmons and Clifford Chance have Brexit hotlines staffed by lawyers to help clients. 

Other law firms have set up teams to answer queries on the wide ranging implications of Brexit from tax, employment, financial regulation, intellectual property and company law.

Until the UK formally leaves the EU, all existing legislation will remain the same. But after a Brexit, the UK’s parliament will face a substantial legislative review process. 

In the short term, lawyers have warned that clients may pull out of some existing contracts or property transactions which have built-in Brexit clauses.

Guy Lougher, a London-based partner and head of the Brexit advisory team at law firm Pinsent Masons, said: “This is a huge change. Clients need to systematically look at every aspect of their commercial operations and the legal and financial risks they face after Brexit.

“Some corporate and commercial property deals have Brexit clauses in place and people have delayed signing them until today. Some of those deals are now not likely to happen. Other areas of law such as cross border acquisitions may see a reduction in work. ” he said.

Mark Curtis, head of the international corporate and commercial practice at law firm Simmons & Simmons, said that the firm’s Brexit hotline had been getting calls from clients even before Thursday’s vote. 

“We are going to see an extended period of uncertainty . . . clients need to plan and assess what they need to do and cover all aspects of their operation from data to employment,” he said.

Jean-Pierre Douglas-Henry, UK head of litigation and regulatory at DLA Piper, said some parties might seek to terminate contracts on the basis of Brexit: “We may see a rash of Brexit-related contract disputes, arising because agreements no longer operate as intended post-Brexit or else refer to European legal concepts that may no longer apply.” 

What are the biggest legal challenges in the event of a Leave vote? FT readers share their insight

Lord Goldsmith QC, London co-managing partner at law firm Debevoise & Plimpton, said the regulatory and legal implications of Brexit will be significant.

“The environment in which businesses operate here and in Europe is going to fundamentally change as EU and UK law is unpicked, and new patterns are established.” he said.

After a withdrawal from the EU, the UK parliament would have to decide whether to replace existing laws derived from the EU or to retain them. 

Some laws in areas like consumer rights stem from standalone acts of parliament such as the Consumer Rights Act 2015. 

However many EU trading laws are incorporated into UK law by secondary legislation under the 1972 European Communities Act, which could be repealed. To avoid large gaps in domestic law, it would need to keep a large part of EU law by converting it into UK law.

Lawyers have already warned that Britain faces constitutional mayhem as the ECA and other primary legislation implementing EU laws are incorporated directly into the devolution statutes in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.

To complicate matters further, some areas of law such as environmental law now fall within the powers of the devolved governments in Scotland and Wales so the UK could potentially end up with four possible replacements of one EU law.

Some areas of UK law are more harmonised with the EU — such as intellectual property law where the majority of registered trade marks and designs that take effect in the UK are in fact EU registrations. 

EU laws are incorporated into the devolution statutes in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland

Following Brexit, lawyers warn that certain Europe-wide protections for companies such as European trade marks and design rights might no longer be available. 

Competition law could also be affected. UK antitrust law largely mirrors EU law but additional cost and uncertainty could result from the need for companies to comply with both EU competition law and a separate UK competition law regime. There could also be parallel regulatory investigations into cartels for example.

Many aspects of UK employment law — such as discrimination rights, holiday entitlement and paid leave stem from EU legislation. Lawyers believe that some controversial EU regulations like the Working Time Directive relating to holiday pay and working hours could eventually be repealed or diluted by parliament, which could cause serious uncertainty for businesses. 

However others believe that an immediate large-scale repeal of employment laws is unlikely as that would cause massive disruption and cost to business.

Some areas of domestic law will be largely unaffected by Brexit including criminal law. But the European Arrest Warrant — which currently allows criminals who flee to other EU countries to be brought back to the UK to face justice — might disappear.

