Swiss central bank holds rates, keeps eye on UK vote

2016-06-16

Switzerland’s central bank has held steady on rates at its latest quarterly meeting, as expected, and reminded markets that it will continue to defend the haven franc from rapid advances. In an increasingly familiar refrain, it also cites the impending UK referendum on EU membership as an economic risk.

A British vote to quit the EU on June 23 would probably lead to a significantly stronger franc, hitting Swiss exporters and beefing up deflationary pressures. But the Swiss National Bank decided at a policy meeting in Bern against pre-emptive action, leaving its main interest rate unchanged at minus 0.75 per cent.

In a statement, the SNB said

At the same time, the SNB will remain active in the foreign exchange market, as necessary.

The negative interest rate and the SNB’s willingness to intervene in the foreign exchange market are intended to make Swiss franc investments less attractive, thereby easing pressure on the currency. The Swiss franc is still significantly overvalued. The SNB’s expansionary monetary policy is aimed at stabilising price developments and supporting economic activity.

On Brexit, it says:

Significant risks remain for the global economy. Furthermore, the imminent UK referendum on whether to stay in the European Union may cause uncertainty and turbulence to increase.

During recent financial crises, the franc has acted as a haven for investors. In January last year, the SNB shocked investors by unexpectedly announcing it was abandoning its efforts to cap its value against at SFr 1.20 to the euro. The currency subsequently strengthened sharply.

Over the past 12 months, heavy tactical intervention in foreign exchange markets by the SNB has helped weakened the franc’s value – but the currency has started to appreciate again this week as opinion polls showed EU opponents taking a lead in the UK campaign.

Nonetheless, higher oil prices have led the central bank to bump up inflation forecasts.

