The British public takes revenge on the City of London

2016-06-24

The adrenalin rush that built in the City of London on Friday morning was palpable. Some of it was excitement at the short-term opportunity. Hedge funds and traders stand to make a lot of money out of the market mayhem, assuming they get their bets right and can cope with the deluge of client orders.

Beyond the market turbulence, another benefit of Brexit may be lurking in the minds of bankers: they stand to escape the bonus cap imposed by the EU a couple of years ago.

More fundamentally, though, the heightened adrenalin levels reflect a sense of panic — that markets will roil for months to come and that City jobs are likely to be lost, not least among the thousands of EU nationals who staff the City’s biggest employers and will lose their freedom of movement.

Few have been as upfront as HSBC and JPMorgan in signalling that thousands of roles will move abroad. But move they will.

Hundreds of international banks, insurers and asset managers use London as a springboard into the rest of the EU, basing pan-European staff in the City and then using “passporting” rules to do business, free of red tape, right across a region of 500m inhabitants.

Some believe Britain will be able to negotiate some form of single market access from outside the EU. But the danger for the City is that employers will not hang around to find out how practicable any such deal might be. Banks say they will not act hastily but bosses will want to end uncertainty for staff and clients as quickly as possible. It is hard to imagine them waiting for two years.

No single EU financial centre will draw jobs from the City of London — Frankfurt, Paris, Dublin, Warsaw and even Lisbon are all likely beneficiaries. That will not only hurt the City. It will be bad news for the broader EU financial system. Europe will no longer have such a dominant financial services hub, a magnet for millions of support jobs and a robust challenger to fast-growing rivals such as Singapore and Shanghai.

If ever they have a quiet moment in the days and weeks ahead, senior financiers will be left to wonder whether they played it as they should have in the run-up to the Brexit vote. Pro-EU voices will criticise those in the City — and the broader business community — who failed to speak up in favour of membership.

Others may suggest that those who did come out strongly in favour, such as Goldman Sachs, JPMorgan and HSBC, stoked anti-banker sentiment. After all, the vote for Brexit is a rejection — most obviously of EU bureaucracy and EU-sponsored immigration, but also perhaps of a still thriving City of London that, eight years after the financial crisis it helped cause, remains resented by a large segment of the British population.

patrick.jenkins@ft.com

