Londoners dismayed at UK’s European divorce

2016-06-24

More than 60,000 Londoners have signed a petition calling on the mayor to declare the capital’s independence and remain inside the EU.

The Londoners joined Scotland in seeking separation from the droves of disaffected English who voted to sever ties with the rest of Europe.

“London is an international city, and we want to remain at the heart of Europe,” says the petition. “Let’s face it — the rest of the country disagrees. So rather than passive-aggressively vote against each other at every election, let’s make the divorce official and move in with our friends on the continent.”

James O’Malley, a 29-year-old writer who started the petition, conceded he expected just a few hundred signatures for his not entirely serious proposal but said “a couple of people have contacted me being super-serious, saying let’s do leaflets, let’s start a party. Maybe I’ll do a rally or something.”

Thursday’s vote to leave the EU, showed once again how the capital was different from the rest of the country. Seven of the 10 counting districts with the biggest Remain votes were in London, and the city as a whole voted 60-40 to stay in. The rest of England voted 55-45 for Leave

Mr O’Malley demurred when asked if places such as Watford would become border towns. “To be honest, my petition so far is a bit like the Leave camp. I’ve got a nice idea, but I haven’t thought it through. I couldn’t tell you if we have a Norway model or an Albanian model. Clearly there is scope for further study.”

Yet while full independence is unlikely, London is likely to seek more autonomy. Sadiq Khan, the city’s mayor, said he wanted to be part of Brexit negotiations with the EU, alongside Scotland and Northern Ireland. His election manifesto said he wanted City Hall to take control of spending on skills and further education.

“Although we will be outside the EU, it is crucial that we remain part of the single market. Leaving the single market of 500m people — with its free-trade benefits — would be a mistake,” said Mr Khan. “I will be pushing the government to ensure this is the cornerstone of the negotiations with the EU. It is crucial that London has a voice at the table during those renegotiations.”

He declined to comment on the independence petition.

Sectors such as foreign exchange trading have boomed during EU years

Ben Rogers, head of the Centre for London think-tank, said: “London’s distinctiveness from the rest of the country is likely to assume growing significance over coming years.”

The Leave vote was “likely to foster a stronger sense of distinct identity. We can expect to see growing support for moves to give London more power to govern itself.”

The capital has deep links with Europe — almost one in 10 Londoners are from other EU countries. 

Mr Rogers pointed out that London might be better positioned to cope with Brexit than other parts of the country.

“London is in many respects relatively well positioned to get through Brexit. The capital has increasingly strong economic relations with the world beyond the EU — more so than other UK nations and regions that supported Brexit but could prove less resilient to it.”

