Cameron channels his inner-Churchill to banish Brexit foe

2016-06-19

Whatever happened to not mentioning the war? After Hitler and Churchill, on Sunday night it was the turn of Neville Chamberlain to stalk the EU referendum debate. 

The mention of the former Conservative prime minister achieved one thing — it fired up David Cameron, allowing him to find his feet in the first referendum TV set piece since the murder of Labour MP Jo Cox. 

The moment arrived with venom. “Mr Cameron,” a middle-aged audience member began, his finger in the air. “You say that your policy that you’ve negotiated with Europe cannot be overruled. It can. So are you really the 21st century Neville Chamberlain, waving a piece of paper in the air, saying to the public, ‘This is what I have, I have this promise, where a dictatorship in Europe can overrule it?’ Answer the question — yes or no.”

Mr Cameron did not answer yes or no, because he had something better up his sleeve. He first explained that Britain was not a quitter. “No, no, no, no,” interrupted moderator David Dimbleby. “You’ve made that point.” In fact, as Mr Dimbleby found out, the prime minister was only getting started. 

“At my office I sit 2 yards away from the Cabinet Room where Winston Churchill decided, in May 1940, to fight on against Hitler. The best and greatest decision perhaps anyone’s ever made in our country. He didn’t want to be alone. He wanted to be fighting with the French, and with the Poles, and with the others. But he didn’t quit. He didn’t quit on Europe. He didn’t quit on European democracy. He didn’t quit on European freedom. We want to fight for those things today. And you can’t fight if you’re not in the room.”

The applause reversed and Mr Cameron had his moment. 

Until then, he had struggled to gain momentum, faced with now familiar audience hostility. It wasn't just immigration. Questioners didn’t think much of the economic risks of Brexit (“We’ll be relying on experts!” says one) or his own future (“When the British public vote to leave, how can you as prime minister possibly remain?” asked another). 

A Leave vote could topple Cameron and trigger long negotiations 

Mr Cameron found himself in a debate over whether it mattered that the EU’s share of world trade had fallen in recent decades. “I don’t want to baffle you with the statistics,” the prime minister eventually conceded, with an exasperated smile. 

Another questioner brought news of high unemployment in Greece and Spain. “You want to spend five minutes with me, I can tell you all about it,” he said. The prime minister did not take him up on the offer. 

Even after the mention of Chamberlain, Mr Cameron endured sticky moments. He refused to commit to vetoing Turkey’s membership of the EU. He had to defend his record on the NHS and immigration. But as he did so, he didn’t have the look of man waving a piece of paper in vain.

