Brexit vote batters UK stocks

2016-06-24

The FTSE 100 and FTSE 250 both came under heavy pressure early in the day as Britain’s decision to leave the EU rattled markets and raised the threat of a UK recession. 

The UK-focused FTSE 250 was hardest hit by the Brexit vote — falling 12 per cent in opening trade, its biggest single-session loss on record and taking it back to levels last seen in 2014. Some of its best-known household names came under heavy pressure on concern about the outlook for the domestic economy. The index pared its losses to close 7.2 per cent lower at 16,088.05.

The UK’s main stock index initially fell by over 8 per cent but rebounded from the worst of its losses to end down 3.2 per cent at 6,138.69. That marks a rise of 1.9 per cent for the week, its first weekly gain this month. At its lowest point on Friday, it was back at levels last seen in February. 

Investors braced for more volatility as the process of pricing in the implications of the vote starts on a morning of financial turbulence and political uncertainty following the resignation of prime minister David Cameron. 

On the FTSE 250, retailers tracked worries about pressure on consumer spending. Thomas Cook, the tour operator, closed down nearly 16 per cent and shares in Sports Direct lost 17 per cent. 

Concern about the implications for the UK economy hit shares in temporary staffing agency Hays, which dropped nearly 30 per cent in the day but recovered to 112p, an 18 per cent fall. 

There was a bigger fall for the mid-cap financial stock Aldermore, which lends to small-and-medium sized businesses and buy-to-let landlords. Its shares fell 32 per cent in the day, making it the biggest faller on the FTSE 250. 

There was only one sector making big gains — precious metal miners. Among them, Polymetal International, the Russian gold producer, rose nearly 6 per cent. Acacia Mining, formerly African Barrick Gold, ended 17 per cent and was the top gainer. 

The picture was similar on the FTSE 100, where Randgold Resources, closed up 14 per cent to lead the small clutch of six gainers, which mainly shared defensive properties. Fresnillo, the Mexican silver miner, was up 12 per cent. There was a big gap to the next biggest riser, Arm Holdings which gained 6 per cent.

Taylor Wimpey, a UK housebuilder, made the biggest single loss on the FTSE 100, down 29 per cent in closing trade. It had earlier been down over 40 per cent. Redrow went on the most volatile run, falling to a day-low of 100p, before bouncing back to 345p. 

Royal Bank of Scotland led the financial sector lower, falling to close 18 per cent down at £205.3. Aberdeen Asset Management ended 11 per cent lower, while at the close Barclays was 18 per cent down and Lloyds Banking Group lost 21 per cent. There were also big losses in the insurance sector. 

“A technical recession in the UK may now be a given, followed by a period of very slow growth in a period of heightened risk and uncertainty as the UK moves to exit,” said David Owen, chief European Economist at Jefferies. 

“But, as we have warned, ultimately the bigger fallout may be seen in the rest of the EU.”

James Illseley, portfolio manager of JPMorgan’s UK Equity Core Fund, said: “While there is an overseas earnings buffer for the FTSE 100 from constituents that earn revenues in foreign currency, there is also likely to be a big impact for European assets and we’ll be watching that. 

“We want to see how much liquidity is in the market. It’s going to be highly volatile. The vote is known, but further political uncertainties are now a factor in the markets, not least for the governing Conservatives.”

Traders and analysts were bracing for further uncertainty and there were also steep losses on equities markets in Europe, as investors across global markets absorbed the implications of the vote. The Xetra Dax 30 fell 6.8 per cent in Frankfurt, while the CAC 40 was down 8.0 per cent in Paris. 

Eric Lonergan, manager of the multi-asset M&G Episode Defensive Fund, said: “It is too early to tell the impact on the UK and European economies because everything depends on the terms of the relationship the UK and Europe negotiate. 

“It will be a long time before we know what leaving the EU means — the possibility of a general election can’t be ruled out, or even an EU constitutional summit to offer the UK alternative terms.”

Other assets rooted in the financial sector were showing signs of strain. Credit default swaps on indices for senior and subordinated bank debt, which reflect the cost of insuring against default, have spiked to their highest level since February. 

Coco bonds, which convert to equity or are written down when banks take heavy losses, have also fallen. Late on Friday, a Barclays £1bn coco is down 5.6 per cent and a €1.75bn Deutsche bond has fallen 4.9 per cent.

Additional reporting by Thomas Hale

