Brexit deals a grievous blow to the international order

2016-06-24

Make no mistake about it. Britain’s vote to leave the EU is the most damaging blow ever inflicted on the liberal democratic international order created under US auspices after 1945. Pandora’s box is well and truly open.

All Britain’s allies and friends, from Australia, Canada, India, Japan and the US to London’s 27 EU partners, had urged British voters to vote Remain. It is hard to think of anyone, beyond Britain’s borders, who will rejoice at the referendum result outside Moscow, Pyongyang and the hiding places of assorted terrorists.

No state has left the EU since Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg and the Netherlands founded the European Economic Community with the 1957 Treaty of Rome. Greenland voted in a 1985 referendum to leave, but it is a self-governing Danish territory, not a state.

Many in continental Europe will observe that Britain, almost from the day of its accession in 1973, has been a semi-detached EU member. Yet during the past 43 years it has played a constructive role in advancing the EU’s single market and in supporting its enlargement into post-communist central and eastern Europe.

Now, by a narrow 52 to 48 per cent margin, British voters have ignored the advice of their foreign friends to stay in. In a club that sees itself as embodying the spirit of peaceful co-operation in a continent ravaged down the centuries by hatred, prejudice and war, the British will be the first to walk out.

The repercussions will be immense in Britain and the rest of Europe, but also around the world. In the EU, practically the only politicians toasting the result are anti-establishment populists, mostly on the extreme right.

Think of Marine Le Pen of France’s National Front, or Geert Wilders of the Dutch Freedom party. Each calculates that the British vote will dispirit their domestic rivals and smooth their path to greater political influence.

Demagoguery and hypocrisy in continental Europe have received a boost because Britain, a land with a long tradition of practising and defending freedom, has turned its back on the EU. The demagogues claim to admire British democracy for being brave and solid enough to stage Thursday’s referendum on EU membership. In reality, they despise not just EU values but every principle of moderation and pluralism that has served Britain so well since the 1688-89 Glorious Revolution.

By stimulating populism and contempt for elites, the result will refocus the attention of financial markets on the half-built house that is the eurozone. France, Germany and others in the currency area will, of course, stress that their unity and resilience are in no way diminished by the British referendum.

Bitter disagreements remain on initiatives such as common deposit insurance to bolster the eurozone’s banking union. Wolfgang Schäuble, Germany’s finance minister, has even said that the European Central Bank’s unconventional monetary policies are to blame for the rise in support for the rightwing populist Alternative for Germany party.

For Washington, meanwhile, Britain’s departure from the EU will be another European alarm bell after the sovereign debt and banking sector crisis, the refugee and migrant emergency and Russia’s intervention in Ukraine. The EU, bereft of Britain, will have its work cut out to avoid giving the impression to the US that it is congenitally disunited and too frail to overcome its own challenges.

In economic terms, Britain’s exit from the EU will mark the disappearance of an ally who has spoken with a strong voice on free markets that usually harmonised with US interests. Without Britain, it becomes difficult to see how the EU will fulfil its stated aim of achieving the comprehensive free trade accord that is under negotiation with the US. 

For Asian countries, too, the referendum result is no cause for celebration. Andrew Small, a scholar at the German Marshall Fund of the US, puts it well: “Every Asian economy has banked on Britain as its gateway to the EU, a phrase echoed publicly and privately by senior officials from all sides.”

From Tokyo to Washington and Brussels, the question will be asked, with a mixture of frustration and despair — “What on earth did the British think they were doing?” 

tony.barber@ft.com

