Citi, Jefferies seek to reassure after Brexit vote

2016-06-24

The chief executive of Citigroup has moved to soothe nerves over the impact of Brexit, telling staff there would be no “immediate” ramifications for employment terms or the way the bank could conduct its business.

In a memo, Michael Corbat said the vote was having “significant repercussions within the financial markets, which could affect the UK economy”. “Our clients need our support.”

Shares in Citigroup, which according to KBW has 8,000 UK employees, were down 8.5 per cent in New York, report Alistair Gray and Ben McLannahan in New York.

Ahead of the referendum Citi’s UK head James Bardrick said a Leave vote would mean the bank would likely need to “rebalance” its operations “across the EU”.

Still, Mr Corbat wrote on Friday: “The UK is unlikely to formally exit the EU for at least two years, and during this period there will be no change in the way Citi is able to conduct its business.”

“Last year, we created a group of senior leaders from across our businesses and functions to ensure we were prepared for this possible outcome.

“While the result of the vote is not what we would have preferred, our diligent work over the past six months means we can be confident that Citi is well positioned to continue to serve our clients.”

He added that the Leave vote would have no “immediate” impact on EU nationals who work for Citi in the UK, nor its UK nationals in the EU.

The view was echoed by Jefferies, the New York-based investment bank, which reassured its 800 or so staff in London that it will not take any “knee-jerk” actions in response to the UK’s vote to leave the EU.

In a memo to all employees on Friday, chief executive officer Richard Handler and Brian Friedman, president, wrote that Jefferies saw “continued validity and unique upside in a global, full service, true Wall Street and City of London firm.”

The firm has a duty to “stay the course” to help clients navigate markets, the pair added, now that the referendum “places the world once again in new and uncharted waters.”

“We don’t see a formulaic, knee-jerk or wholesale action as the answer, but rather will assess all facts and act in the long-term interest of every one of our constituencies,” the duo wrote in the memo, which was obtained by the FT and its contents confirmed by a Jefferies spokesperson.

They added: “This vote has consequences much broader than markets, and we hope that leaders around the world will digest the underlying social, geopolitical and economic motivations and impacts that are prevailing, and practice leadership rather than politics in the critical days, months and years ahead.”

Shares in Jefferies’ parent company, Leucadia National, were down about 8 per cent by 1pm in New York, underperforming a financials sector about 5 per cent weaker.

