Square Mile frets as referendum looms

2016-06-22

Nerves are so frayed in the City of London, says Edward Bonham Carter, vice-chairman of Jupiter Fund Management, that financial professionals find themselves “in an unusual position — praying”.

In most — but far from all — cases, London’s financial elite is praying for a vote to remain in the EU in Thursday’s referendum, after a long and bruising campaign that polls now say is neck and neck.

In the City, worries about Brexit range from the personal to the geopolitical, despite a strong dose of Euroscepticism.

Brexit could force thousands of staff specialising in euro-denominated securities to relocate to Frankfurt, Paris or Dublin. It could deprive UK banks and insurers of EU “passports” that allow them to sell products throughout Europe. A weaker equity market could choke off European initial public offerings worth many billions scheduled over 12 months.

Then there are the fears of a systemic shock to fragile markets.

Even though Mr Bonham Carter describes himself an optimistic “muddle-throughist”, he worries that markets could be destabilised rather like the climax of the block-balancing game Jenga: “You pull the UK out of the EU and the whole pile falls.”

One banker even suggests that a Leave could trigger a “Lehman-scale event”, an outlying prediction that shows how deeply anxieties run.

Bank stocks would get hit immediately, says a weary bank executive “because bank stocks always do. It is reflexive. They get bashed if Wales beats Russia at football, too.”

Michael Spencer, chief executive of exchange technology group ICAP and long a prominent Eurosceptic, sees parallels between a Leave vote and sterling’s ejection from the European Exchange Rate Mechanism in 1992. 

But he doubts the gloomiest forecasts of George Soros, the investor who bet against the Treasury that year and won. He says: “A 20 per cent drop in sterling would take it to $1.15. I think a 10-12 cents fall on the day is more likely.”

Mr Spencer supports the Remain camp, fearing the longer-term impact of a Leave vote. This surprised his friends, one of whom, he reports, emailed the message: “Suffolk is out.” Mr Spencer adds: “It is a fair question whether Suffolk was ever in.”

Xavier Rolet, chief executive of the London Stock Exchange, sees the referendum as the latest incarnation of a perennial conflict between internationalism and nationalism. 

But despite his philosophical view of the vote, the Frenchman is far from relaxed about the outcome. Mr Rolet says: “We are close enough to the precipice to realise what the consequences of retrenchment [from Europe] would be.”

In the case of the LSE, whose emblematic merger with German counterpart Deutsche Börse has been warmly welcomed by most investors, a Leave vote could mean moving a huge chunk of securities clearing to the continent, or even New York given a likely push in the eurozone to bring euro-denominated swap clearing on to the continent.

Sectors such as foreign exchange trading have boomed during EU years

The boss of a big financial institution is also pondering relocating staff to the continent, but says: “We wouldn’t be sending the removal vans round to their homes on Monday. I will be in early on Friday because I’m interested, not because I’m manning a crisis-response team. I will have worked out how to structure the business by January.”

Back in 1992, forex brokers left evening drinks unfinished on the bar as they rushed back to their offices to sell the pound. Many of their successors will trade through Thursday night and Friday morning. But dealing is now often automated. The clunky golf computer game that entertained previous generations of brokers during night shifts has long vanished.

There is a wide spectrum of opinion on the impact of a Leave vote, an outcome most positively embraced by a private equity boss who anticipates buying opportunities.

The consensus is that downside risks are heavy and include a full-scale global bear market. As Mr Bonham Carter puts it: “The City is a tough and leathery old beast. But it survives because it is paranoid.”

jonathan.guthrie@ft.com

————————-

Brexit? In or Out

————————-

