Losing Lord Hill via Brexit would land City with mountain of woes

2016-06-22

A Conservative peer does not automatically merit sympathy, compared, say, to a puppy with a bandaged paw. But spare a thought for Lord Hill on the day of the Brexit referendum. He is European Commissioner for financial services. If Britons opted to quit the EU, he would be unemployed, or a full-time member of the House of Lords, which is virtually the same thing.

A continental politician would take over Lord Hill’s scheme for capital markets union. The UK would be excluded from influencing and perhaps participating in the grand plan. That would be a pity. CMU is meant to substitute new securities markets for waning areas of bank lending across Europe, among other things.

The City would be the natural place to transact such business, since three-quarters of European capital markets business already passes through here. However, a Brexit vote would likely rob banks and brokers of the pan-European passport needed for the work. Continental subsidiaries would have to handle it.

CMU is emblematic of the larger problem for the City as Europe’s financial centre if Britain Brexits. It would become semi-detached. This could have some advantages — offshore status propelled the growth of the eurobond market in the sixties, after all. A Brexit could free financial businesses from such restrictive regulation as pay ratios, too.

But disadvantages would loom larger. The City is a textbook-perfect illustration of the economic value of clustering related enterprises so they can feed off one another. The sum is always greater than the parts. 

The Remain campaign prophesied disaster so vociferously that, like Cassandra, it risked being ignored. If business had extolled free trade and tolerance of foreigners instead, they would have had a bigger impact. 

Too late to carp. The moment of truth has arrived. So imagine Lord Hill, forced by harsh financial necessity to resume his old trade as a PR man. Picture him rising at chilly dawn to extol a struggling mid-cap engineer to a grouchy City columnist, by whom he is peremptorily rebuffed. No one deserves that. Brits should vote Bremain and keep Lord Hill in a job.

Sharp intake of breath

A 6 per cent share price fall is not the valediction most chief executives want. But Michael Sharp, who steps down as chief executive of Debenhams on Friday, had the misfortune to front a third-quarter update on Wednesday that warned of weaker margins. Full-year profits are expected to be at the lower end of a range of £113m-£121m.

Department store chain’s update comes at difficult time, with UK consumers spending less on clothing

That would be no better than the out-turn last year, and less than the department store chain achieved in 2011-12, which was Mr Sharp’s first financial year at the helm. 

Traditional retailers have had to run hard to keep up in recent years. Debenhams operates in the middle of the road and has done well to avoid being run over, as BHS was.

The thundering juggernaut is John Lewis. This is owned by employees. They provide a superior service to customers in return for holding down fulfilling jobs, which are as important as profit margins. 

Debenhams’ shares have accordingly gone nowhere over the period, according to S&P CIQ.

It is a little ominous that Mr Sharp will be replaced in September by Sergio Bucher, an executive at Amazon. The US online retailer does not “do” margins at all, or enjoyable shop floor jobs if critics are right. Debenhams new chairman, the astute Ian Cheshire, has the job of reorienting him.

The off-the-peg business model Debenhams is reaching for is that of the multichannel retailer. Online sales have risen to 15 per cent of the total. But the company remains in its bones a department store operator. Mr Sharp has neither proved nor disproved the case for such legacy businesses to exist. Mr Bucher must do better.

Bogle moguls

In the Scottish countryside it was traditional to plant a rowan tree by your door to ward off witches and tatty bogles. The absence of these was taken as proof of efficacy. 

Recommendations aimed at lessening risks posed to wider financial system

The Financial Stability Board has proposed stress tests for funds according to the same precautionary principle. A new consultation document argues as follows: a) there is no evidence regular investment funds contribute to instability; b) suppose they do, though, eh? c) better regulate them heavily, just in case.

The macroprudential supernanny has fretted a fund could suffer a run of withdrawals because investors know a credit line is limited. Greater disclosure of illiquidity, as proposed by the FSB, appears as likely to provoke a panic.

The greatest regret of asset managers when reading the consultation is that they cannot invest in financial regulation, an industry empowered to extend its addressable market with the stroke of a pen.

jonathan.guthrie@ft.com

