The Times declares support for Remain campaign

2016-06-17

The Times has declared its support for the Remain campaign, arguing that a vote for Brexit would unleash “unknown and alarming consequences” for the UK and Europe.

With just six days to go to the referendum and with campaigning suspended following the killing of the Labour MP Jo Cox, the Rupert Murdoch newspaper announced its editorial decision with the front-page headline “Why remain is best for Britain”.

The support of The Times will be seen as a significant boost to David Cameron, the prime minister, and the Remain camp after Mr Murdoch’s other UK daily newspaper, The Sun, came out forcefully for Brexit this week.

With the Brexit camp edging ahead in the polls before campaigning was suspended, The Times’s endorsement may convince Mr Cameron and his supporters that they are still capable of delivering victory next Thursday.

Despite endorsing the Remain camp, the paper’s editorial remains sceptical on many aspects of the European project and calls on the prime minister to use the mandate of a referendum triumph to lead a “renewed drive for reform within the EU”.

It also sympathises with Brexiters’ concern at high levels of immigration but dismisses calls to shut Britain’s borders, saying that immigration has “for centuries fuelled the UK’s enterprise and creativity”.

While Mr Murdoch’s open Euroscepticism suggested that The Times might join The Sun in supporting Brexit, The Times has a largely metropolitan readership that is in favour of EU membership. 

To back the Leave campaign would have run counter to the views of its readers and may have had disastrous commercial consequences at a time when the paper is focused on growing its number of online subscribers.

With The Daily Telegraph, Daily Mail and Daily Express all likely to back Brexit and the Guardian, Daily Mirror and the Financial Times in favour of Remain, Fleet Street’s daily papers are evenly divided on next week’s vote.

That is in stark contrast to the previous referendum in 1975 when all the UK national newspapers backed joining the European Economic Community.

