Brexit Countdown: Voting day

2016-06-23

The referendum has finally arrived. There are no exit polls; the overall result may be clear by 3.30am. The latest opinion polls favour Remain, but the picture is fairly confusing.

Best of the FTKate Allen on why the pollsters struggle. John Burn-Murdoch on companies using new surveying methods. A Leave vote could still produce a Brussels fudge. Hedge fund star Pierre Lagrange explains why he has turned his back on Brexit.

Operation CroissantDe Gaulle would be spinning in his grave. On Wednesday, French anglophiles dispatched hundreds of croissants to St Pancras, along with postcards urging Brits to remain in the EU. “There are not enough croissants in France to express how much we love you guys!” wrote one Parisian, who may have a different view when England knock his side out of Euro 2016 next week.

Sadly/ happily, the croissants fell foul of electoral rules on bribes and were donated to a homeless shelter. But nos amis, there is nothing against you spontaneously sending another batch next week if we vote Remain. 

How to knock on doorsVote Leave has kindly emailed with instructions on how to knock on doors on polling day. “Remember that the purpose of knocking up is simply to protect and encourage our core vote,” the official Out campaign explains. 

Therefore “if anyone is undecided, do not try and convert them, but move on to the next house!” Undecided voters — we cared about you, we flattered you, but you have now missed your chance.

Independence DayCan the Brexiters agree on anything? “Let’s make June 24 independence day for Britain,” Boris Johnson told a crowd in Cornwall last month. This week he decided that June 23 would be better. “This Thursday could be our country’s independence day!” he told the audience at the BBC’s Wembley debate. Unfortunately, Ukip are sticking with June 24. Don’t update your diary just yet.

————————-

UK’s EU Referendum: How people would vote

For a more detailed summary of opinion polling visit the FT’s Brexit poll tracker page

————————-

Sublime to ridiculousTim Farron, the Liberal Democrat leader, came up with a zinger at the BBC debate: “Perhaps the quote of the whole campaign is Michael Gove saying we’ve had enough of experts. Well, that’s perhaps an explanation of why he was such a dreadful education secretary.” The crowd went wild.

But what’s this? Mr Farron on his battle bus on Wednesday — doing a karaoke version of John Barnes’ rap from the England 1990 World Cup song ‘World in Motion’, by New Order. “You can be slow or fast, but you must get to the line,” rapped Mr Farron, demonstrating why his old band was once dubbed “a fourth rate New Order”. 

From glory to tragedy in a few hours — at least it was a fitting tribute to English football. 

Quote of the day

Freeborn men and women should cryO why, o why, o whyHave they imprisoned us With this grand lie.

A verse of anti-EU poetry from Ukip MEP Steven Woolfe.

