One problem with super-skinny gilt yields

2016-06-17

The eye-popping, record-breaking rally in UK government bonds this week has dampened down a little today. But by any sensible measures, yields on gilts are at rock bottom. As a reminder: this is an awkward development for pensions.

Ten-year yields now stand at 1.15 per cent, with 30-years at 1.975 per cent, driven in part by concerns that if the UK leaves the EU, it could trigger a recession that bumps the Bank of England into more easing. (The BoE itself has described the possibility that the UK votes to leave as a potentially global risk to markets.)

Neville Hill, an economist at Credit Suisse, points out that 30-year yields are closely related to the size of corporate pensions deficits in the UK, as his chart below shows. Mind the gap.

Citi writes that it expects yields to stay low whatever the outcome of next week’s EU referendum:

If “leave” wins the market will price rate cuts and slower growth. If “remain” wins, there should be a back-up, but yields will likely be kept low by doubts about Fed hikes, scarcity risk in Bunds, and unknowns about when/if domestic growth will rebound.

John Bilton, global head of multi-asset strategy at JP Morgan Asset Management agrees:

If the UK does vote to exit the EU, there is some vulnerability to Gilts from sales by foreign investors, who own 30% of the outstanding stock of bonds. In our view, however, this selling could be easily absorbed by the domestic investor base. Moreover, in the event of Brexit, the BoE is very likely to resume its QE program, which should keep Gilt yields low.

On a remain vote, Gilt yields should rise modestly as the uncertainty premium leading up to the vote recedes.

But regardless of the referendum’s outcome, we see limited room for Gilt yields to rise significantly; the UK business cycle is maturing at the same time that fiscal policy over the next two years is forecast to be tighter than it was over the last two years. Looking past the Brexit vote, as asset allocators we’ve recently upgraded our view on Gilts from underweight to neutral.

Looking at the bigger picture, BNP Paribas is now looking for 10-year US yields to fall as low as 1.4 per cent. They’re now at 1.6040 per cent having hit a four-year low yesterday.

Read more: 50 Ways To Hedge Your Brexit: Part 1; Part 2

