Ford could cut UK jobs after Brexit vote

2016-06-24

Ford has said it “will take whatever action is needed” to keep its UK operations competitive in a sign the car group may be preparing to cut costs in the wake of the Brexit vote.

The company employs 14,000 people at its sites in Bridgend and Dagenham, and last year made 1.6m engines at the plants, all of which were exported, writes Peter Campbell, Motor Industry Correspondent, writes Peter Campbell, motor industry correspondent. 

Its exports are worth £1bn a year, of which 51 per cent go to the EU.

Ford said:

We will continue working toward this goal with key stakeholders in the UK and across the other Member States and EU institutions to ensure they understand our concerns which mirror those of the majority of the UK and European auto industry.

While Ford will take whatever action is needed to ensure that our European business remains competitive and keeps to the path toward sustainable profitability, we have made no changes to our current investment plans and will not do so unless there is clear evidence that action is needed.

The group has already stripped out a large amount of cost from its European bases over the last several years, closing two plants in the UK and one in Belgium during 2012, with the loss of 5,700 jobs.

Jim Farley, the chief executive of Ford’s European business, told the Financial Times last month that the company was looking to strip out more costs.

He said: “I don’t think a 113 year-old company would be thriving if it didn’t always look atits structural costs”.

Aston Martin, which employs 1,800 at its plant in Gaydon, previously said a Brexit may make its exports more competitive.

On Friday chief executive Andy Palmer said the company “will now orientate its business to deliver our mid-term plan”, which may involve “the need for additional productivity and efficiency in the medium term”.

He did not comment on the company’s plans to spend £200m building an additional factory in Wales, which would have created 1,000 jobs.

Jaguar Land Rover, the UK’s largest car maker producing more than 500,000 vehicles a year, said it was “business as usual” until the negotiations over trade barriers were completed.

“Nothing has changed for us or the rest of the British automotive industry,” the company said.

