Emerging markets suffer dollar haven flows

2016-06-24

The UK’s vote to leave the EU depressed currencies and stock prices in the emerging world on Friday as investors sought out quality assets and fretted that longer-term uncertainties over Europe’s economy could expose vulnerabilities in the developing world.

“The flip side of a rally in safe haven assets — such as US Treasuries, Japanese government bonds, the US dollar, the Japanese yen and others — has been a sell-off in emerging market assets,” said Neil Shearing, chief emerging markets economist at Capital Economics. 

Much of the impact was seen in central and eastern European countries that have strong commercial relations with the UK. The Polish zloty, Hungarian forint and Romanian leu had all lost more than 3 per cent of their value against the US dollar by midday UK time on Friday. 

However, Asian emerging markets were also seen to be at risk from the secondary effects of Brexit. A stronger Japanese yen, in particular, was damping the outlook because Japanese investors have been buoyant buyers of Asian and Latin American bonds in recent years, buying a cumulative ¥3,832bn ($39bn) and ¥18,836bn ($192bn) respectively since 2010. A stronger yen could make emerging Asian assets relatively less attractive. 

“The strengthening yen is the biggest risk,” said Frederic Neumann, head of research in Asia at HSBC. “The risk is that flows from Japan to emerging Asia could start to dry up.”

Financial markets will be more sensitive to eurozone vulnerabilities

The other big potential impact could come from China. Although the renminbi slid only 0.7 per cent against the US dollar by midday UK time on Friday, analysts were concerned that a prolonged phase of dollar strength could force Beijing to pursue depreciation and trigger a chain reaction among China’s Asian suppliers.

“I think that Chinese officials will prioritise stability above all else,” said Mr Neumann. “I would be very surprised if Beijing threw in the towel at this stage, but if the dollar continues to fly then that might become a more difficult position to hold.”

Some analysts, however, said China’s internal weaknesses might engulf its resistance later this year, forcing it into a depreciation. “We maintain our view that the structural imbalances (in China) are likely to come to a head this year, leading to another wave of weakness in EM Asia as competitive devaluation renews,” said Emad Mostaque, strategist at Ecstrat. 

Stock prices were also softer, with the MSCI Emerging Market stock index, a benchmark index, down 3.3 per cent at midday on Friday. 

