Investors seek bargains as EU vote shakes markets

2016-06-24

Retail investors entered a buying frenzy following the result of UK’s vote to leave the EU on Friday, as they looked to snap up bargain stocks. 

Sterling plunged to a 30-year low, while the FTSE 100 share index was down 8.7 per cent just after the market opened to trading at 8am. It later recovered ground to close 3.2 per cent down on the day.

Several companies saw their share prices plunge, with Barclays and Royal Bank of Scotland suffering falls of more than 20 per cent.

Hargreaves Lansdown, the UK’s largest retail broker, said its customers were seeing market falls as a buying opportunity, with 80 per cent of trades placed through its share dealing service orders to buy shares. 

Hargreaves said this was up from 60 per cent on an average day. Broker AJ Bell, meanwhile, said that nearly three-quarters of its orders were buy trades. 

TD Direct began the morning by saying three-quarters of its trades were to sell stocks, but by midday this had swung around so that the majority of trades were buy orders.

Laith Khalaf, senior analyst at Hargreaves, said investors were “out in force bargain-hunting”. 

“The most popular stocks are also those which have seen their prices hit hardest this morning, namely the banks and housebuilders,” he said. 

Lloyds Banking Group was named as one of the biggest fallers but it was also the most purchased share, closely followed by Barclays and housebuilder Taylor Wimpey. 

TD Direct said UK bank Lloyds was the most popularly traded stock among retail investors, making up 15 per cent of trades, closely followed by Barclays. 

Investors were both buying and selling the stock, the broker said, with any pattern aside from high volume hard to discern. 

“Lloyds is an easy trade and it’s a good trading stock. It’s usually a bellwether for how people are feeling at [that] moment,” said Michelle McGrade, chief investment officer of TD Direct Investing. 

However, beyond a handful of stocks, “just about all of the trade is noise”, said Ms McGrade.

The company said investors were buying FTSE 100 stocks, with activity more muted for FTSE 250 stocks.

Hargreaves Lansdown blames volume of trades

AJ Bell echoed this: “The FTSE 100 is outperforming the mid-cap FTSE 250 and small-cap Aim benchmarks by quite some distance,” said Mr Mould.

Analysts say companies in the FTSE 250 index, which is made of small and mid-cap companies, are less attractive as they have more exposure to the UK economy than larger FTSE 100 companies. 

“The problem with the UK is that the market is somewhat split — one half is focused on global earnings and the other half is focused on domestic factors,” said Thomas Becket, chief investment officer at PSigma Investment Management.

Mr Becket said he thought investors would be eyeing international companies following the referendum result on Friday morning, but that small and mid-cap opportunities would present themselves in coming weeks. 

Although the results of the UK’s decision to leave the EU will be felt in the short term in the stock markets, Hargreaves has seen BlackRock’s specialist gold mining fund surge to the top of its bestseller list, pushing CF Lindsell Train UK Equity and CF Woodford Equity Income into second and third place respectively. 

AJ Bell also noted a rush for gold: it said that precious metal miners were the most sought-after sectors as investors sought safe-haven assets. 

Fund managers reminded retail investors that a UK exit would not affect all global asset classes. Eric Lonergan, multi-asset fund manager at M&G Investments, said that there was “a strong case” for investing outside the UK.

“Portfolios concentrated on the UK are very vulnerable to a big decline in sterling,” he said, but he added that there were plenty of uncorrelated asset classes. 

“If you look at China, what happens to the UK economy really doesn’t matter to them,” said Mr Lonergan. “If you look at Japan, what matters is their fiscal plan.

Housebuilders, banks and high street stocks hit hard as main equities indices make broad losses

“The main area of uncertainty is the UK economy,” he said. “The truth is nobody knows what’s going to happen.”

Neil Woodford, the star fund manager, appeared unfazed: in a note to investors on Friday, Mr Woodford reiterated his view that the UK’s “long-term economic future” would be “largely unaffected” by exiting the EU.

“That is not to say there won’t be challenges in the near-term,” he said. “There will. We now face a period of uncertainty as the exact terms of Britain’s exit from Europe are negotiated. 

“Financial markets loathe uncertainty as amply demonstrated by this morning’s reaction across all asset classes.”

Mr Woodford said he had not made any changes to his portfolio as a result of the vote, and that he was already positioned for “a challenging world, characterised by low growth, deflation, debt problems, weak productivity and troubling demographics”.

