Whatever happened to the China crisis?

2016-06-19

In January, the markets panicked about a hard landing in China, accompanied by fears of a sudden devaluation of the renminbi that could spread deflationary pressure throughout the rest of the world. In the event none of that happened, and the markets rallied sharply. Why did China-related risks suddenly dissipate, and might they return?

One reason why the risks abated had little to do with China itself, and everything to do with the Federal Reserve. In the midst of the global market melt-down in February, key members of the FOMC, led by Bill Dudley, realised that financial conditions in the US were excessively tight as a result of the rising dollar, and they suddenly adopted a far more dovish tone.

Many people think that an international “meeting of minds” occurred at the Shanghai G20 conference in late February. As a result, the Federal Reserve delayed its rate increases, the Bank of Japan and the ECB desisted from “devaluationist” monetary policies, and China set its face against a sudden devaluation of the renminbi. All this eased global financial conditions and, in a period of dollar weakness, calmed the currency markets.

This improvement in global financial relations may not last forever. It is true that the FOMC is beginning to recognise the importance of foreign economic conditions for its own domestic policies (see David Beckworth).

However, as Lawrence Summers pointed out last week, they have repeatedly returned to the “normalisation” of interest rates whenever they are given the slightest excuse for doing so. The bond and equity markets of Japan and Germany continue to show all of the symptoms of worsening deflationary pressures that might force the hands of their central banks in the not too distant future, even without the added headaches from Brexit.

What about events inside China itself? Here, there is some good news, and some less good news.

On the good news side, the balance of policy has generally shifted in a favourable direction in the course of 2016. Some months ago, I suggested that the right policy mix for China would involve six key elements: accelerated closure of excess manufacturing capacity; an urgent clean-up of the banking system; easier monetary policy; easier fiscal policy; a controlled devaluation of the exchange rate; and a continuation of market-oriented structural reforms.

The basic idea was that the rebalancing of the economy towards the service sectors had barely started, but was increasingly necessary. When it gathered pace, it would probably involve a negative demand shock to the economy which would need to be countered by easier fiscal and monetary policy settings.

It would also involve a shock to the financial sector, since the disguised bad debts in the corporate sector, especially the SOE’s, would be exposed. In order to retain confidence in the economy and the currency, the banking sector would need to be recapitalised by shifting some of their bad debts more formally into government debt. It would be easier to restore confidence, and reduce capital flight, if the exchange rate were no longer seen by the markets to be overvalued.

There has been progress in each of these areas in recent months. On monetary policy, while interest rates have not been cut, there was a significant increase in monetary growth early in the new year, which is normally a reliable signal of monetary stimulus in China. The stance of fiscal policy remains opaque, but it has been relaxed, and will be expansionary by around 0.5 per cent of GDP this year, according to forensic investigation by JP Morgan.

The pace of factory closures in the manufacturing sector has clearly been increased, following the emphasis placed on rebalancing at the National People’s Congress this year. For the first time, there has been a shift in real resources away from manufacturing and investment, towards new sectors. Previously, there had been deflation in manufactured goods prices, but no shift in employment or real factory output.

As a result of all of these measures, the economy has once again stepped back from the brink of a hard landing, and is now growing, on the official figures, above the 6.5 per cent target for 2016.

On the less good news side of the equation, however, there are three key concerns.

First, the benign policy mix that has emerged in recent months does not seem to have been the result of a joined-up series of agreements between the various actors in the policy-making process within the Chinese government. In fact, a remarkable intervention by a so-called “authoritative person” in the People’s Daily in early May has been widely taken to have been a direct warning about the dangers of the recent economic stance from sources close to the office of President Xi Jinping himself.

This intervention directly criticised virtually all aspects of the recent easing in macro demand policy, arguing that it would delay the inevitable rebalancing of the economy and inject further leverage into an over-leveraged economy. Opinions differ about whether this was intended to be a direct personal attack on the policies of Premier Li Keqiang but it clearly raises serious doubts about how the policy mix might develop in future.

Second, the IMF has recently warned very strongly that the problem of excessive corporate debt needs to be tackled much more decisively than has happened so far. David Lipton spelled this out in a very clear speech last week, calling for debt work-outs, corporate restructuring and improved governance, and recapitalisation of the banking system on an urgent timescale.

He said that the corporate debt write-downs might amount to “at least” 7 per cent of GDP, which is a surprisingly low estimate. More likely, the write-downs will prove to be much larger, and will take many years to complete. They are clearly proving very difficult from a political and practical point of view, as they usually do in emerging markets at this stage of development. And dangerous stress in the corporate debt market is becoming far more visible.

Third, there is the continuing mystery over the PBOC’s exchange rate strategy. In January, the central bank appeared to “clarify” that it would be seeking to stabilise the renminbi against a basket of currencies, while allowing greater flexibility than before against the dollar. Since then, however, the Chinese currency has embarked on a continuous path of depreciation versus the basket, at a rate of around 12 per cent per annum. This has happened both when the dollar has been rising and when it has been falling.

While the RMB decline is in the right direction, the communication of the policy has once again been highly confusing, and there are signs that capital outflows from China might be starting again, as doubts creep in about a clandestine devaluation.

In the past few years, China risk has waxed and waned, without ever quite going away. The very slow-burning “crisis” is still rumbling along, without any clear signs of an early resolution in either direction.

