Businesses will shoulder some of the blame for Brexit

2016-06-22

UK plc appears to have had little impact on voting intentions in Thursday’s EU referendum. Despite the big business endorsements for Remain, polls suggest that at the end of the campaign, support for staying in the EU has either stayed broadly unchanged, or actually weakened.

This may be because, as a recent YouGov poll suggested, more people distrust well-known companies than trust them. But it may also be because such endorsements have been either late or halfhearted. 

The business community may well come to regret these failings. Sir Richard Branson, the UK’s most recognised business person, launched his “national campaign” to remain in the EU on Monday. Yesterday, The Times printed an anti-Brexit letter signed by 1,285 business people. This was a significant increase on previous exercises of its kind — in February the Remain campaign marshalled just 36 FTSE 100 company bosses (and 162 others) to sign a similar letter.

But while both campaigns must be pretty tired of the legwork involved in organising missives of this type (and there have been a few), given that this was the last push — and the necessary blandness of the text — it is surprising the letter did not attract more signatories. Just 51 of the bosses of Britain’s largest listed businesses on the FTSE 100 put their name to it. 

The signatories themselves should raise an eyebrow or two. Not one, but five partners of Accel, a venture capitalist, signed up. And does anyone really think of author and philosophical pontificator Alain de Botton, who appears on the list as “Founder, School of Life”, as a businessman? But, as with previous pro-Remain letters, the list immediately raises more questions about who did not sign than those who did. 

Who knows whether the 49 FTSE 100 bosses who did not sign the letter actually support leaving the EU. But the alternative explanations are not impressive. Although former Tesco boss, and business grandee, Sir Terry Leahy, has spoken out in favour of Remain, the current chief executive of the supermarket chain did not sign. Nor did many other household names who surely would have held most sway with voters.

Even out of the 51 big bosses who did sign, several took the feeble option of signing “in a personal capacity”, including the chief executives of WPP, Reckitt Benckiser and Whitbread, respectively Martin Sorrell, Rakesh Kapoor, and Alison Brittain.It is not atypical of Mr Sorrell, probably the UK’s most highly paid CEO, to think that his views are well worth hearing. But, frankly, who cares what business leaders think “in their personal capacity”? It is as employers that their opinions are valuable.

Such pusillanimity gives a clue to the FTSE 100 non-signers’ reasons. Many continue to feel that political debate is not their sphere, and they get more grief than benefit from dipping their toes into it. Some continue to believe — erroneously — that a Brexit will not affect them. At other big businesses, like Lloyds, there is a genuine split of opinion on the board. 

But if the bosses who refused to put their name to the letter believe a Brexit would be detrimental to their business, then riding on the coattails of others who are courageous enough to speak out publicly is irresponsible. 

Business is not the only culprit guilty of a failure of nerve in the debate. No politician, similarly, has dared to make the positive case for immigration. But if we vote to leave the EU tomorrow, the silent business majority will only have itself to blame.

sarah.gordon@ft.com

