Investors flee retail stocks for fear of Brexit backlash

2016-06-24

The UK high street had already been battered in the weeks leading up to the Brexit referendum.

Analysts said that Friday morning’s stock price falls anticipated tougher trading conditions that may not be visible for several months.

“The financial markets react immediately,” said an executive at one big UK retail chain. “The real world takes about six months.”

Investors sold out of UK retailers, fearing the twin threats of a collapse in consumer confidence and the cost of a weaker pound after Britain voted to leave the EU.

London-listed retailers lost close to a third of their value in the minutes after markets opened, before settling about 11 per cent lower — about twice the decline in the broader market.

Sports Direct, the group founded by billionaire Mike Ashley, suffered one of the steepest falls on Friday morning, losing 16 per cent of its value in early trading. 

The company, which buys many of its products from Chinese factories, faces higher buying costs after sterling lost 10 per cent of its value overnight as the referendum decision became clear.

The impact of currency movements is expected to take time to drop through to prices and profit margins since retailers typically hedge their foreign currency exposure. 

On Friday, Sports Direct said in a statement that the “material changes” to sterling exchange rates were likely to hit in 2017 when its overseas purchasing was not fully hedged.

Executives at several big retailers expressed concern that they might not be able to pass the full cost on to customers at a time when confidence may be knocked by political and economic turmoil.

Recent trading statements from some retailers have showed that consumer spending is already under pressure.

Debenhams this week reported a quarterly decline in like-for-like sales and pointed to “ uncertain trading conditions” in the UK clothing market. That followed a warning last month from Next of a “potentially wider slowdown in consumer spending”.

News, comment and analysis on the referendum to decide whether Britain will leave the EU.

That comes on top of the high-profile failure of BHS in April.

Bruno Monteyne, an analyst at Bernstein, argued that consumers would inevitably pay higher prices in the grocery market at least.

“Retailers can by no means absorb anything of the order of 5 per cent extra input inflation,” he said, adding that the weaker pound “impacts all retailers”.

German discounters Aldi and Lidl may be hit harder than traditional supermarket groups, added Mr Monteyne, since they buy more of their products in euros.

In the past decade, foreign investors have rushed to invest money in the British retail sector, attracted by the perceived stability of property-backed businesses in an economy enjoying a consumer-led recovery. 

The uncertainty surrounding the retail business in the aftermath of Thursday’s poll could deter some investors. 

Steinhoff, which only last week launched an attempt to take over discount chain Poundland, said on Friday it was “considering its position” in light of the referendum and its impact on the global market.

The South African furniture conglomerate also owns New Look, a British fashion chain, and this year attempted to buy Home Retail Group, the owner of Argos catalogue stores.

However, one British retailer argued that collapsing share prices could be a spur to more such deals. “If these valuations are the new normal then these are historically cheap numbers, even in pound terms. Add to that the weaker currency and it could propel further deals.”

The British Retail Consortium warned that retailers and consumers would suffer if the UK dropped out of the EU’s free trade area.

The lobby group urged the government to explain how it would rewrite British laws to incorporate a panoply of product standards and other regulations that were previously handled in Brussels. This process, it warned, was “likely to be time-consuming and resource-intensive”.

“Without clarity, retailers, other businesses and hence the economy will suffer from a prolonged period of uncertainty,” it added.

