Goldman’s bankers should read their own rulebook

2016-06-17

Since the 2008 financial crisis, any week in which Goldman Sachs does not make the news in a controversial fashion is a good one for the US investment bank. On that measure, the past week has been poor.

As Goldman’s role in the sale of the collapsed retail chain BHS by the entrepreneur Sir Philip Green was examined by a parliamentary select committee, a trial in London heard of lurid behaviour by one of the investment bank’s former employees. Youssef Kabbaj, a sales executive, was said to have “procured” the services of two prostitutes in Dubai to facilitate a transaction.

The two incidents are unconnected — the latter concerns a financial deal dating back to 2008 between Goldman and the Libyan Investment Authority, the country’s nascent sovereign wealth fund, which ended with the LIA losing $1.2bn. But they come at a sensitive time, again provoking controversy about a bank that tries to pride itself on discretion.

Goldman has also attracted scrutiny over its role in raising money for 1MDB, a Malaysian state fund linked to possible corruption. The Malaysian fund paid Goldman up to $300m in 2013 for arranging a $3bn bond issue, although the corruption allegations do not relate to that, while the bank received at least $80m from the LIA. 

These examples show how global Goldman’s business has become since it started to expand in Europe in the mid-1980s. They also demonstrate how finance now reaches into places that would previously have been beyond Wall Street’s grasp. That can bring big rewards but also big risks, both to balance sheets and reputations.

In the background is Goldman’s role, low-key but definite, in the debate over whether the UK should leave the EU. The bank has said little publicly: Michael Sherwood and Richard Gnodde, co-heads of its London-based European division, wrote in 2013 that Brexit would lead to “a decline in investment and hiring” in London, but have kept quiet recently. 

Goldman has, however, been one of the biggest donors to Remain — giving £500,000 to the Britain Stronger In campaign — and has been singled out by leaders of the Leave campaign for criticism. Although other banks have also supported Remain, Goldman is often cited as a symbol of the financial elite.

In a sense, this is accurate: it is an elite institution and often gains from being one. It was dragged into the spotlight in 2010, after it reached a $550m settlement with regulators over its role in the subprime mortgage crisis. But most of its work is at the top end of Wall Street, discreetly advising investment funds and wealthy investors, including Sir Philip, and fixing big deals.

Being famous, even a little notorious, has benefits. One of the questions over the LIA deal is why Goldman was paid so much for proposing and executing what was quite a simple — and as it turned out, wrong — investment strategy. The LIA might have been swayed by Goldman’s allure and did not put it through the kind of competitive business tender that would be common in developed markets.

Text messages sent by Mr Kabbaj to the Dubai prostitute are the most headline-grabbing aspect of the LIA case but not the most resonant. This prize goes to emails sent by other former Goldman bankers describing the LIA as having “zero-level sophistication” and the deal as “a pitch on structured leveraged loans to someone who lives in the middle of the desert with his camels’’.

Patrick Jenkins and guests discuss allegations against Goldman Sachs, investment banking fees in the US versus Europe, and conduct issues at Standard Chartered, with special guest, chief executive Bill Winters.

No one describes Sir Philip, owner of the Arcadia retail group, as lacking in financial acumen. Goldman turned down a formal role in his sale of BHS, perhaps forecasting that no percentage of the sale price of £1 would be an adequate fee, but it still gave him some free advice. Sir Philip was a client of its wealth management arm and it wanted to keep on his right side.

The recent publicity recalls the aftermath of the 2008 crisis, which led in 2010 to Lloyd Blankfein, Goldman’s chief executive, setting a review of its general conduct. It led to an effort to curb conflicts of interest and ensure employees did not exploit clients. Goldman, like other banks, has tried to stop staff from sending embarrassing emails.

The review reiterated the “business principles” drawn up by John Whitehead, its former senior partner. The first was that “our clients’ interests always come first” and second that “our assets are our people, capital and reputation”. Another, aptly in view of the controversies, was that “our business is highly competitive and we aggressively seek to expand our client relationships”.

Once, that meant pushing its way into deals on Wall Street. Now it involves extending Goldman’s business globally. Emerging markets are known as rewarding but volatile — an investment fund may get higher returns but it also takes more risk. 

For investment banks, that equates to high fees but it also brings high reputational and operational risks.

In the Malaysian and Libyan cases, the rewards may themselves have been a risk. As the deals have been re-examined, the fact that they were so lucrative for Goldman has led to tough questioning. Should it have realised the potential for abuse in Malaysia, and did it exploit the client’s inexperience in Libya to be paid more than usual?

Goldman may not need another conduct review but these cases indicatethat its employees should re-read the results of the last one. Once, Goldman did not risk having its emails and past deals publicly exposed to legal and political scrutiny. Now it does, and recent events suggest it has yet to adjust to the change. 

john.gapper@ft.com

