Brexit Countdown: Westminster in mourning

2016-06-16

Political reaction

Politicians on both sides of the European debate expressed horror and grief at the murder of Jo Cox, the 41-year-old Labour MP. A vigil was held in Parliament Square on Thursday evening and campaigning will not resume until Saturday at the earliest.

David Cameron cancelled a planned pro-EU rally in Gibraltar, the first time since 1968 that a British prime minister would have visited the territory. “We’ve lost a great star,” he said in a statement. “She was a star for her constituents, a star in parliament and a star right across the House.”

The Spanish prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, who had opposed Mr Cameron’s decision to campaign in Gibraltar, condemned the “terrible attack” on Ms Cox. “Violence has no place in democracy,” he said.

Vote Leave, the official Out campaign, called a halt to Boris Johnson’s bus tour, which had started the day with a light-hearted trip to a fish market in Suffolk. “Our campaign is suspended. Our thoughts and deepest sympathies are with Jo Cox’s family,” it said in a statement.

Nigel Farage said he was “deeply saddened” by Ms Cox’s death. The UK Independence party leader cancelled a speech planned for Friday. He had spent the morning in Westminster launching an advertising campaign featuring a photo of a large number of Syrian refugees arriving at the Slovenian border last year.

Tim Farron, the Liberal Democrat leader, said he was “utterly heartbroken” at the news of Ms Cox’s death. “Her compassion for the voiceless and dispossessed absolutely shone through to me. She was a star of the 2015 intake and was inspiring to listen to,” he said. “Our country is poorer for this mindless slaughter.”

The BBC had been due to air two political analysis programmes, Question Time and This Week, on Thursday night, both of which would have focused on the referendum campaign. It cancelled both programmes. Mr Cameron is due to appear on a Question Time special on Sunday evening.

The day had begun with tense exchanges between the Bank of England governor Mark Carney and the Vote Leave campaign. Although the Leave campaign had taken a lead in opinion polls, polling organisations had emphasised a large number of undecided voters could still determine the outcome of the referendum.

Excerpt from Jo Cox’s maiden speech, June 3 2015

“I am sure that many right honourable and honourable Members will claim that their constituencies consist of two halves or numerous parochial parts; I am another in that respect, and Batley and Spen is very much that kind of constituency. It is a joy to represent such a diverse community.

Batley and Spen is a gathering of typically independent, no-nonsense and proud Yorkshire towns and villages. Our communities have been deeply enhanced by immigration, be it of Irish Catholics across the constituency or of Muslims from Gujarat in India or from Pakistan, principally from Kashmir. While we celebrate our diversity, what surprises me time and time again as I travel around the constituency is that we are far more united and have far more in common with each other than things that divide us.

My constituency is also home to Fox’s Biscuits and Lion Confectionery, so I am sure you will not think it an indulgence, Mr Speaker, if I describe Batley and Spen as a constituency with an industrial heart wrapped in a very rich and pleasant Yorkshire landscape — geographical, historical and cultural . . .

Of course, Batley is a town that has sent Labour MPs to this place for the best part of a hundred years. One of them, Dr Broughton, is of course famously credited with bringing down a government, so I respectfully put the right hon. members on the front bench opposite on notice. 

The Spen valley has a far more chequered political history, alternately sending Labour and Conservative MPs here to Westminster for much of the 20th century. Nothing made me prouder on May 8 than to be sent to this place with an increased Labour majority, proving again that in my neck of the woods non-conformity is what we do best . . .

I am Batley and Spen born and bred, and I could not be prouder of that. I am proud that I was made in Yorkshire and I am proud of the things we make in Yorkshire. Britain should be proud of that, too. I look forward to representing the great people of Batley and Spen here over the next five years.”

Henry Mance will be writing his daily referendum briefing until the EU vote. Sign up to the email at ft.com/countdown 

