Insurance sector hit hard by Brexit vote

2016-06-24

Shares across the insurance sector fell heavily in the wake of Britain voting to leave the EU, with many in the industry concerned about the impact of the referendum result on Lloyd’s, London’s insurance market. 

One of the big attractions to insurers of operating via Lloyd’s is that it has passporting rights into the EU. Many of the insurers who do business there at the moment say that after a Brexit they will simply shift some of their business to subsidiaries within the EU, bypassing the Lloyd’s market in the process. 

Lloyd’s, which campaigned heavily for a remain vote, was putting a brave face on the result on Friday morning. “I am confident that Lloyd’s will stay at the centre of the global specialist insurance and reinsurance sector,” said John Nelson the market’s chairman, adding: “The attractiveness of the Lloyd’s platform goes far beyond licences: robust financial security, global brand strength, and unrivalled underwriting expertise. These qualities have stood the test of time.”

Shares across the sector fell heavily on Friday, with the life insurers worst hit. In London Aviva, Legal & General and Standard Life all fell by more than 15 per cent, while in continental Europe Axa and Generali were also sharply down. Analysts blamed macroeconomic concerns in general but in particular the impact of widening credit spreads. 

US insurers were also caught up in the markets rout. MetLife and Prudential Financial fell 7 per cent. American International Group, which has a sizeable operation in London, was down 4.7 per cent.

Insurers hold large portfolios of corporate bonds to cover their liabilities. Any fall in the value of the bonds could dent the insurers’ solvency ratios in the short term, although as they tend to hold these bonds to maturity there may be no economic damage unless corporate defaults rise. 

Aviva has the added complication that about a quarter of its profits come from continental Europe, according to Eamonn Flanagan, analyst at Shore Capital.

In a statement, Aviva said that the vote would “have no significant operational impact on the company. Aviva’s operations in the UK and its other subsidiaries in the EU are well capitalised and continue to trade as normal.” 

The insurer also said that it had “one of the strongest and most resilient balance sheets in the UK insurance sector with low sensitivity to market stress.”

Prudential, which has large businesses in the US and Asia and little exposure to continental Europe, was down just 7 per cent. In a statement to staff chief executive Mike Wells said: “We do not expect the result to cause any significant change to our operations in the foreseeable future.” 

Life assurers’ asset management operations are also expected to suffer because of the market turmoil. “The market fall will hit annual management fees,” said Mr Flanagan. “Their cost bases are fixed and when the market goes up they have operational gearing on the upside. On days like today, it’s the opposite.”

The impact on the non-life insurers was more muted, given that many of them have little cross-border business and hold very conservative investment portfolios. Shares in Direct Line, RSA and Admiral were all down in mid-single digits. 

Not everyone in the industry may have given much thought to the Brexit question, however. A survey by law firm Kennedy’s ahead of the referendum found that “most firms said it was too early to undertake detailed contingency planning until the outcome of the vote was known. To do otherwise risked incurring unnecessary cost.”

