After Brexit, an estranged land heads for divorce and remorse

2016-06-24

In the end, a man who always looked like the incarnation of British common sense gave his nation chaos. David Cameron mounted a defence of his premiership as he resigned on Friday but history will remember him for one failure and nothing else, if only because his compatriots will be living with it for years. 

A leader cannot call a referendum on a question as large as the EU, lose it and expect posterity to take his innovative social reforms in mitigation. Not since Anthony Eden’s botched military intervention in the Suez Canal 60 years ago has a prime minister left office more ignominiously than this. Even Tony Blair won a third general election after the Iraq war before taking his leave.

From the germ of Thursday’s referendum result could sprout a recession, a snap general election, a period of draining diplomacy with Brussels over the terms of exit and, as mooted by Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s nationalist first minister, the UK’s fragmentation. Years will pass before this shock works its full effect.

In the meantime, a country that was a synonym for stability — that brandished its stability as a lure to investors — is suffused with doubt. Even the future of Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, whose independence was scurrilously questioned by Leave campaigners, is uncertain. Voters renewed Mr Cameron’s mandate last year precisely because he stood for dependable continuity in an unquiet world. His legacy will be the opposite.

The roster of achievements now certain to be obscured includes the single-handed electoral revival of an ailing Conservative party, the founding of a bipartisan coalition when Britain needed a government, reforms to every major public service and, impressively for a rural Tory who was not as liberal for as long as you might think, the creation of same-sex marriages. Through it all there was a slapdash streak and a quickness to capitulate to his party but, whatever his stumbles, he always seemed to land on a bed of eiderdown. Historians will now study that pattern of near-misses as a series of warnings.

This did not feel like a country straining to cashier its head of government, or one prepared for the turbulence ahead. If, as expected, it is Boris Johnson who succeeds Mr Cameron over the summer, he will take on a burden that makes his old job as London mayor look like part-time volunteer work. 

News, comment and analysis on the referendum to decide whether Britain will leave the EU.

Having swayed voters with a prospectus of vastly reduced immigration, he has to make it real. That will involve striking a deal with the EU. At the moment, Leavers cannot even strike a deal with themselves. It is a movement of socially conservative voters led by liberal free-traders. One side is about to be disappointed. If it is the masses, an already seething electorate will lose whatever scrap of trust it had in the political process.

While constructing this sovereign idyll, the new prime minister — and, given George Osborne’s low reputation among Leavers, the new chancellor of the exchequer — will have to keep economic sentiment perky. Britain had persistent deficits in its current account and government budget even before the chill on investment caused by the mere prospect of EU exit. Mr Cameron described the economy as “fundamentally strong” as he stood down on Friday. That is for markets to determine.

The new prime minister must also take on Ms Sturgeon as she pushes for another referendum on Scottish secession and defuse the majority of Tory MPs who voted Remain, many of whom will wonder why a leader who helped to get them elected is evacuating Downing Street before he turns 50. Then there is the awkward position of pro-European Northern Ireland, where the idea of unity with the Republic is already in the air.

Above all, there is the cultural estrangement of one Britain from another. This country, it was easy to think until now, is divided only in the way that any complicated democratic society is divided. It is not as if France or America are lands of immaculate harmony. But the referendum exposed something very particular here. Although they are at opposite ends of the country, London and Scotland appear to share a sensibility — internationalist, anti-conservative if not anti-Conservative — that fares badly in much of the space in between. There is lots of glib talk among politicians concerning the urgent need to bring the nation together. It is hard to see what platform of policies, under which national leader, could possibly achieve this.

Thursday closed one question, and opened so many more. We must hope that Mr Johnson, Michael Gove, Andrea Leadsom and other prominent Leavers have some answers. For if they have chased the prize of sovereignty without knowing what to do with it, the surprise that voters feel at the loss of Mr Cameron will become dismay, then remorse, then anger.

janan.ganesh@ft.com

