Brexit raises doubts over Tata Steel’s UK operations

2016-06-24

The EU referendum result could damage the chances of Tata Steel, Britain’s biggest steel producer, maintaining its operations in the UK, according to a person close to the company.

Its shares fell 9.1 per cent to Rp303.70 on Friday morning in Mumbai, a drop beaten only by the 11.6 per cent decline for sister company Tata Motors, which also has a major UK subsidiary, Jaguar Land Rover.

Tata put its UK steel business up for sale in March after heavy losses. It is due to shortlist two bidders from the seven that expressed interest in buying the operations, but it has also been in talks with the government about support to enable it to stay.

There will now be “recalibration” after the news that the UK will leave the EU, a major market for Tata Steel UK, the person said. “This could change everything.”

The company’s official statement was much milder. “Decisions by the UK electorate will always be respected by Tata Steel. Whatever the political framework, we are committed to developing the best prospects possible for our UK operations,” it said.

The Bombay Stock Exchange’s benchmark Sensex fell 3.8 per cent on Friday morning. As well as the Tata companies, banks were also hard hit, with ICICI Bank down 6.9 per cent, and Axis Bank falling 5 per cent.

Voters in Neath Port Talbot, home to Tata’s biggest steelworks, supported Brexit by 57 to 43 per cent. In Wales as a whole, the Leave camp won by three percentage points.

Stephen Kinnock, the local MP, had warned that “chaos and uncertainty” unleashed by Brexit would weigh heavily on the British steel industry. 

“What impact would Brexit have on the order book? Will it be a Canada or a Norway model? Could Brexit open up the floodgates to Chinese dumping even further, as we will be out on our own, lacking the leverage and shelter that being part of a trading bloc of 500m people brings?” he wrote recently. 

The referendum result could raise questions about the political survival of Sajid Javid, the business secretary leading the attempt to rescue Tata Steel UK. Mr Javid is a soft Eurosceptic who backed Remain, partly out of loyalty to David Cameron. His removal would mean more uncertainty for Tata. 

The private talks between Tata and the government came under fire this week from workers at Tata Steel UK. Members of the Community trade union from each of the business’s sites met in London and issued a statement expressing “serious concerns about the integrity” of Tata’s sale process.

“If Tata do indeed intend to retain the business, then they need not only to make this clear to their loyal workforce, but also lay out their long-term plan for investment in steelmaking,” the statement said. “Were Tata to remain, they would have a long way to go in regaining the confidence of steelworkers.

Additional reporting by Michael Pooler in London

