Asia stocks up, but big weekly drops beckon for Japan, Oz

2016-06-17

Signs of nervousness that have gripped markets in recent days were abating in Asia on Friday, with stocks higher and government bond yields pulling back from record low levels. However, the calmer state is unlikely to be enough to prevent a handful of regional stock markets from ruling off on their worst weekly performance in months.

The Japanese bourse was outperforming its peers, with the broad Topix up 1.4 per cent and the Nikkei 225 ahead by 1.6 per cent. Stocks enjoyed a recovery after slumping by about 3 per cent yesterday when the Bank of Japan’s decision to refrain from easing monetary policy further spurred the yen to its highest level in 22 months, of ¥103.55 to the dollar.

This morning, the yen was 0.3 per cent weaker at ¥104.59, but was eyeing a gain of 2.2 per cent for the week. The Topix and the Nikkei 225 were down 5.4 per cent and 5.5 per cent, respectively, so far this week, heading for their largest weekly drops since February 12.

Australia’s S&P/ASX 200 was up one-third of one per cent on Friday, but its 2.8 per cent decline for the week was also its worst performance since the week ended February 12. Hong Kong’s Hang Seng was up 0.7 per cent today, while on the mainland China’s Shanghai Composite gained 0.8 per cent and the Shenzhen Composite added 1.3 per cent.

Overnight, the S&P 500 edged 0.3 per cent higher as the rally in government bonds cooled. Expectations the Federal Reserve would abstain from raising interest rates on June 15, following the release last week of weak May non-farm payrolls data, as well as rising volatility in global markets has prompted investors to seek the relative safety of government debt, thereby pushing down yields, which move inversely to price.

The yields on the 10-year bonds of Germany, Japan and Australia all hit record levels on Thursday, while the yield on the US 10-year treasury fell to its lowest point in nearly four years.

The yield on the UK’s 10-year gilt reached a record low on Thursday, but has been heading lower in recent weeks as polls show growing voter support for Great Britain to leave the European Union at next week’s referendum on June 23. Among other impacts, “Brexit” may also prompt the Bank of England to delay possible interest rate rises.

The British pound has also been on the receiving end of that anxiety and hit a two-month low during the week. The currency had been heading lower on Thursday amid the global sell-off, but then reversed course following the death of British MP Jo Cox.

Of the overnight movements, National Australia Bank currency strategist Rodrigo Catril explained: “Equities, risk sensitive currencies and the Pound were sold while core global yields and safe haven currencies were bought.

“Losses were then mitigated in the US session with the rebound in risk appetite coinciding with news that campaigning ahead of the UK EU referendum was halted following the murder of a UK labour MP. The recovery in equities and other risk assets occurred amid a gradual easing in bookmakers odds for the UK leaving the EU,” he said.

The pound was up 0.4 per cent on Friday in Asia at $1.4262, while the euro was up as much to $1.1265.

The dollar index, a measure of the US currency against a basket of global peers, was down 0.2 per cent today at 94.413 and eyeing its third-straight day of declines as investors continue to process the dovish policy statement from the Fed on Wednesday, when the central bank took note of the weakness in the labour market, the market uncertainty being caused by international hazards – namely Brexit – and also scaled back its 2017 interest rate forecasts.

Weak US inflation data, released on Thursday, also failed to help the greenback. Gold, which is sensitive to US interest rate expectations, was up 0.1 per cent to $1.279.38 on Friday. The yellow metal was eyeing its third consecutive week of gains, with a 0.4 per cent rise, the longest weekly winning streak since a four-week run to February 12. On Thursday, prices jumped to $1,315.71, the highest intraday level since August 14 2014.

Oil prices firmed on Friday, with Brent crude, the international marker, up 1 per cent at $47.65 a barrel, and West Texas Intermediate, the US benchmark, up two-thirds of one per cent at $46.52.

