‘True mayhem’ – Japanese markets reel from Brexit vote

2016-06-24

Japanese trading floors lurched from frenzied activity to silent disbelief in the closing minutes of Friday trading, as the benchmark Topix index descended to a close 7.26 per cent lower than the morning open.

At one point soon after the lunch break, the sell-off of Nikkei 225 futures became so intense that the market’s automatic circuit breaker was triggered, suspending dealing for 10 minutes as dealing rooms adjusted to the results of the referendum and to the startling sight of the Nikkei 225 Average down more than 1,200 points in a single day of trading, reports Leo Lewis in Tokyo. 

Traders at one of Japan’s biggest securities houses described moments of “true mayhem” not seen since the depths of the global financial crisis.

Traders at smaller houses noted the massive hit that the day’s trading is expected to have landed on small Japanese speculator who trade the popular leveraged Nikkei 225 exchange traded fund and had begun the day in the belief, along with the rest of global markets, that the polls were predicting a win for the “Remain” camp.

The leveraged ETF, which was been the most traded asset of its type in the world for much of last year, lost 16 per cent in its biggest drop since the product was launched four years ago.

Behind those moves, which saw stocks of all sizes and sectors hammered with equal vehemence, were dramatic moves in the yen – the “safe haven” currency which spent the day soaring on light, panicky volumes against sterling, the dollar and the euro.

Jesper Koll, CEO of Wisdom Tree Japan, said that for Japan Inc, “London is primarily a financial center, not a commercial or industrial one. Japanese banks and insurers rely for 25-35% of their non-yen funding on London markets. Fears that this could now be in jeopardy will need to proven wrong in the next couple of trading days.”

Critically, the yen broke the ¥100/$ mark against the US dollar for the first time since 2013, triggering fresh speculation that the Japanese authorities would have little choice but to intervene.

Comments from the Minister of Finance and governor of the Bank of Japan brought some stability to trading, and left the yen at ¥102/$ by the time European trading began in earnest.

Equity dealing floors questioned whether Japan had indeed engaged in some intervention – currency still take the view that it has not, but that it remains a strong possibility that Japan could join with other authorities around the world in market-stabilising measures.

