Time Out shows it still has a countercultural sense of timing

2016-06-19

If Time Out were to list the City’s hot tickets for investment alongside go-to gigs, there would be a conspicuous absence — its own equity.

Last week, the magazine group floated its shares at 150p and they immediately fell to 130p. 

This is the urban magazine of reviews of what-to-do-at-weekends that was founded in 1968 when The Beatles topped the charts with ‘Lady Madonna’.

The group still has a countercultural sense of timing. Other would-be stock market debutantes have avoided floating in the weeks before Brits vote on joining or leaving the EU. But Oakley Capital, which bought Time Out in 2011, ploughed ahead with the issue anyway. 

Hats off to Oakley. It did raise £90m from known investors such as Neil Woodford. Still, it was not the exit that most private equity owners might have wanted after five years. Rather than selling shares, Oakley swapped its debt for more equity and retains 59 per cent of the business. 

But aside from Brexit jitters, stock market investors are uneasy with ventures that are neither start-ups nor profit making. And Time Out has been losing money for half a generation. Last year, its losses before tax and interest, more than doubled to £18.5m. Analysts forecast it will be lossmaking for a good few years yet. 

Fans say Time Out is a long-term play on the digital revolution with the advantage of a well-established brand that can be used and expanded. They may be right that in time it will make good money from traffic to its website reviews, either through advertising or commissions.

It already has 100m-plus users in 100 cities. Recently the group set up its first Time Out Market, a food hall in Lisbon that turns over about £2m a year — about a tenth of revenues. Five more are planned in the US and Europe. 

But like so many media groups that started out rooted in the age of print, Time Out has yet to find a way of reliably replacing revenues from selling hard copies and print-based advertising when blogs and web reviews of hotspots are two a penny.

Oakley Capital has been trying to make the transition for five years. Now it has turned to other investors and allies who stumped up £30m to pay off Time Out’s debt and £58m to spend on technology and repositioning the business online. 

But that may not be enough to turn the title into a smokin’ website for millennials, who are more likely to associate “Time Out” with the “Naughty Step” than the urban high life.

EG needs a solution

Last week four out of six directors walked off the board of EG Solutions. The company, which calls itself a back-office optimisation software pioneer (‘nuff said), did not elaborate. 

The walkouts — which included the finance director and the chairman — are latest in a string of resignations of top bods at EG. Elizabeth Gooch, its forceful founder-chief executive, has seen off three chairmen in about as many years. 

Worryingly, just two directors were left: Ms Gooch and Bob Krakauer, a representative of Aspect, the UK group’s trading partner in the US which owns close to a tenth of EG and recently emerged from Chapter 11 proceedings. 

EG has now signed up Nigel Payne, former boss of Sportingbet, the internet gambling business, and chairman of Gateley Holdings, the recently floated law firm, to be chairman. By Friday, George Rolls, a serial director of Aim companies, had joined the board, too.

Mr Payne is said to be punchy. He will have to be. 

Ten years ago EG Solutions’ shares were 150p. Now they are 51p. In the year to January EG made pre-tax profits of £9,000 against £407,000 last year. Ms Gooch’s salary for the year was £240,000, unchanged from last year. Meanwhile, over three years, she has cut her holding in the group she founded from more than 50 per cent to about 25 per cent. Ms Gooch’s initials may be enshrined in the group’s name, but she has been passing the risks of ownership to other investors who will have something to say to Mr Payne. 

EG boasts of its skills in helping companies to rationalise and restore order to their back offices. Mr Payne must apply those skills closer to home.kate.burgess@ft.com

