UK population hits a record high

2016-06-23

After weeks in which the European referendum has relentlessly thrown the spotlight on immigration, the latest population statistics underline the degree to which the arrivals of the past decade or so have changed the UK’s demography.

According to the latest data from the Office for National Statistics, the UK population reached a record high of 65.1m last year. The year to 2015 saw the highest level of net migration since the early 1990s.

The impact of this wave of inward migration is clearly visible in the 20-36 cohort, the ONS suggests. For most age groups, the patterns to be seen in the 2005 data are mirrored in the 2015 data, 10 years on. However, in the case of young adults, the mid-2015 pyramid is “wider and flatter” than that which could be seen a decade earlier, say the statisticians. Such a change, it suggests, can only be generated by a new population being added through immigration.

For example, the number of children in the 0-4 age bracket in mid-2015 is 17 per cent higher than this age group in mid-2005. The number of children aged 5-16, meanwhile, is down 0.4 per cent from mid-2005 — a result of the lower births around the turn of the century.

Notwithstanding the arrival, since 2004, of eastern Europeans of child-bearing age, the UK population continues to age. Those aged 65 and over now make up almost 18 per cent of the UK population, compared with 16 per cent a decade earlier.

More broadly, what lies behind the statistics is a picture of an increasingly divided Britain. That is a poignant thought as the country awaits the outcome of the EU poll. With stark geographical divisions between Remain and Leave regions, whole swaths of the country look certain to have backed the losing side today — with as yet uncertain consequences for national cohesion.

Britain’s constituent countries have grown at different rates, the data show. In England, the population grew at close to four times the rate of Wales, for example. This rosier English picture did not extend to the north east, whose population rise matched that of Wales.

But divisions go far beyond the pace at which the four nations are growing. Danny Dorling, the University of Oxford demographer, recently analysed the 2011 census and found stark inequities within regions as well as between them. According to his People and Places: A 21st-century Atlas of the UK, the 20 wealthiest areas of the country are now located in London or the south-east of England. Yet poverty has also become more concentrated in London. Seven of the capital’s boroughs had a higher rate of poverty than the city of Glasgow in 2011. 

An already divided nation will discover just how deep its faultline over Europe runs tonight.

sarah.neville@ft.com

