India central bank chief Raghuram Rajan to stand down

2016-06-18

India’s highly-respected central bank governor, Raghuram Rajan, has announced he will step down when his current terms ends in September, news that is likely to dismay international investors who credit him with a crucial role in restoring the country’s macroeconomic stability.

Mr Rajan’s Saturday announcement that he has decided to return to academia — he was a University of Chicago business school professor before returning to India to work in government — ends weeks of fevered speculation over his future.

In a letter to the Reserve Bank of India staff — which was posted on the RBI website — Mr Rajan says he had been open to remaining at the helm of the RBI to see through the work he had begun, but that “on due reflection, and consultation with the government” he had decided to return to academia.

His exit is likely to disturb the Indian markets, at a time when the global market appears to be heading for a period of intense volatility with the upcoming Brexit referendum and an unpredictable US presidential election.

Arun Jaitley, the finance minister, tweeted that the government “respects” Mr Rajan’s decision, and would tackle the question of his succession. “A decision on his successor would be announced shortly,” Mr Jaitley said.

“International investors saw him as someone who brought stability to financial markets, stabilised the currency and got inflation under control,” said James Owen, the senior partner for India and South Asia of Control Risks, the consultancy. “It will clearly create a degree of uncertainty, and raise questions as to who they can find to replace him with that level of credibility.”

Over the last two decades, all governors of the Reserve Bank of India have been granted two-year extensions, after they completed their initial three-year terms. But in recent weeks, Mr Rajan had been publicly attacked by Subramanian Swamy, a highly vocal member of the Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s ruling Bharatiya Janata Party.

The attacks — in which Mr Swamy accused Mr Rajan of “a wilful and apparently deliberate attempt . . . to wreck the Indian economy” and also that he was “mentally not fully Indian” — were seen as reflecting strong opposition to Mr Rajan by influential forces within the BJP.

For his part, Mr Modi maintained an impassive silence in the face of the rhetorical onslaught — and voiced no support for the governor, saying only that a decision as to the future RBI leadership would be made in August, shortly before Mr Rajan’s term expired.

Indian lawmaker’s letter stokes investor fears of more politically pliant replacement

Mr Rajan, a former IMF chief economist best known for his prescient early warnings of the 2008-9 global financial crises — took over as RBI governor in September 2013, as India was being buffeted by skyrocketing inflation and its currency was plummeting.

Since then, he has won accolades from international investors for taming India’s high inflation, working to set up a formal inflation targeting system, and kick-starting a long overdue clean-up of state banks burdened with high levels of bad loans. 

Under his leadership, the RBI issued licenses for a host of new types of banks, which are expected to add new dynamism to the once stodgy state-dominated banking system, which had not had any new entrants in a decade.

In his letter, Mr Rajan said he felt “proud” of these achievements, that he said fulfilled his initial promise of building “a bridge to the future, over the stormy waves produced by the global economy.”

Mr Rajan’s departure is likely to upset many international investors. But in his letter, Mr Rajan said he believed India was well placed to withstand global market turbulence.

“We have worked with the government over the last three years to create a platform of macroeconomic and institutional stability,” he said. “I am sure the work we have done will enable us to ride out imminent sources of market volatility like the threat of Brexit.”

Several of India’s top industrialists expressed disappointment at his decision to stand down. 

“Governor Rajan substantially improved India’s international credibility,” tweeted Anand Mahindra, the chairman and managing director of the Mahindra Group. “However, we must’t give the impression that there isn’t sufficient talent in the country to succeed him and sustain India’s credibility.”

But admiration of his performance is not universal. Many Indian business figures — both large and small — felt he was too hawkish on inflation and should have begun his rate lowering cycle sooner, with more generous cuts.

Mr Rajan also antagonised members of Mr Modi’s BJP by speaking his mind openly, voicing what was sometimes seen as veiled criticism of the ruling party.

Members of Mr Modi’s Cabinet showed their dismay in April when Mr Rajan was seen to be playing down India’s status as the world’s fastest growing large economy, by telling a journalist in Washington that “in the land of the blind, the one-eyed man is king.”

