Brexit Countdown: 1 day to go

2016-06-22

What happened

Remain’s Ruth Davidson shone in a TV debate. Boris Johnson fought his corner with brio but if the Brexiters needed a game-changer, this probably wasn’t it. Half of FTSE 100 companies urged voters to back Remain; Leave has still raised more money.

Best of the FT 

David Cameron tells the FT that investment will surge if Britain votes In (full interview here). Daniel Hannan argues that Britain could trade more freely outside the EU. Here are seven charts about the economic impact of Brexit, and here is Martin Wolf’s take.

Free speech

David Cameron addressed the nation (or the 0.02 per cent who were watching rolling news) from a lectern in Downing Street. The Leave campaign complained this was a breach of the purdah rules on government announcements ahead of a vote. Officials then confirmed that the Prime Minister’s lectern had been paid for by the Remain campaign. It really has come to this.

In for a penny

Jim Mellon, the Brexiter fund manager, says he has started shorting the pound. Good for him: no point taking a stance if you’re not prepared to put your money behind it. Certainly, Vote Leave could do with more supporters like him — and fewer like Gladys Bramall, a former British National Party member who has donated £600,000. “My husband joined [the BNP], he obviously enrolled me at the same time,” Ms Bramall told the website BuzzFeed. “It wasn’t with my knowledge.” The Remain campaign said Vote Leave should return the money. 

————————-

UK’s EU Referendum: How people would vote

For a more detailed summary of opinion polling visit the FT’s Brexit poll tracker page

————————-

Brexit like Beckham

David Beckham is obviously great, and England would not have won the 2002 World Cup without him. But the Remain campaign could have done a better job of putting words in his mouth. “We live in a vibrant and connected world where together as a people we are strong,” Beckham almost certainly did not say. 

Similarly, his now-wife Victoria almost certainly did not tell the Spectator magazine in 1996: “The Euro bureaucrats are destroying every bit of national identity and individuality. Those new passports are revolting, an insult to our kingdom, our independence.”

But at least Mr Beckham agreed with the words put in his mouth. Another former England star, John Barnes, had to ring up Sky News on Wednesday to correct Vote Leave’s assertion that he was an Outer.

Steve Hilton 

You can laugh at him, you can mock him, you can point out that he wanted to legalise flammable sofas, but Steve Hilton is apparently still Britain’s public intellectual du jour. He hit the front page of Tuesday’s Daily Mail with a claim (subsequently denied by others involved) that civil servants had warned Mr Cameron that the Conservatives’ migration target was unachievable.

On an unrelated note, how are sales of Mr Hilton’s book going? According to Nielsen BookScan, the paperback version of More Human has sold an impressive 2,650 copies since its launch three weeks ago. That has probably paid for Mr Hilton’s return flight to San Francisco. Hint, hint. 

Quote of the day

“This referendum is primarily about, ‘are you a little bit liberal or are you a little bit conservative?’ ”- John Curtice, fellow, National Centre for Social Research

————————-

UK’s EU referendum: full coverage and analysis

View the FT’s comprehensive guide to the vote on whether Britain should stay in Europe, with all the latest news, analysis and commentary from both sides of the debate. See more 

————————-

Henry Mance will be writing his daily referendum briefing until the EU vote. Sign up to the email at ft.com/countdown

