India needs to avoid politics in picking Rajan’s successor

2016-06-22

Since the weekend, Raghuram Rajan’s decision to step down as the Reserve Bank of India’s (RBI) governor has generated plenty of headlines. The ability to grab so much news space in the week of possible Brexit underscores his international acclaim and credibility.

Mr Rajan’s fame precedes his stint as the RBI’s governor. But that does not take away from his achievement in deftly guiding India out of an impending crisis by stabilising the currency and substantially lowering inflation. From being deemed one of the “fragile five” when Mr Rajan took office in 2013, India now ranks as one of the least risky emerging market economies in Oxford Economics’ EM vulnerability scorecard. 

This is partly because of the decline in global commodity and oil prices. But the RBI’s reincarnation as a credible inflation-targeting central bank under Mr Rajan’s leadership has played an important role in reviving investor confidence in India. 

His other initiatives, including the sustained effort to improve the asset quality of banks’ balance sheets (and so facilitate a more enduring pick-up in credit growth and private investment), have also earned him praise both at home and abroad. 

It is hardly surprising then that investors have expressed concern at his departure. 

The rupee (INR) has been hit hard. Market participants were already worrying about the possible negative implications of the upcoming foreign currency non-resident deposit redemptions on the INR. 

The concerns have multiplied with the knowledge that Mr Rajan will not be around to manage the FX impact of the $20bn outflows anticipated between September and November. However, the ramifications of the governor’s decision to leave the RBI run deeper than just managing bulky US dollar repayments. 

The two key developments that were initiated by Mr Rajan and remain unfinished are the formation of a monetary policy committee and the ongoing asset quality review (AQR) of bank balance sheets. 

While the RBI is unlikely to reverse course on either, the new governor may give in to the pressure to delay the March 2017 AQR deadline, thus kicking the bad debts can down the road.

In terms of monetary policy, an immediate change in the flexible inflation targeting framework that was institutionalised in March 2015 appears unlikely. 

However, the change in RBI leadership makes the future direction of monetary policy more uncertain. Oxford Economics’ baseline forecast assumes no more rate cuts this year. But now the risk of further easing will depend on the incoming RBI governor.

In this context, Mr Rajan’s departure appears particularly ill-timed, as it coincides with a less certain outlook for Indian inflation and the partial revival of global oil prices. 

Consumer price inflation has already been above the RBI’s 5 per cent target (for March 2017) since October, driven by a marked increase in food prices. Moreover, with monsoon-related risks lurking in the background and the full impact of the increase in public sector wages (as recommended by the 7th pay commission) yet to be felt, upside risks to inflation appear to be gaining traction. Mr Rajan’s presence at the helm of the RBI would have ensured continued vigilance on inflation. 

The Indian government announced welcome reforms to attract foreign investors this week. But India-watchers were distracted by the resignation of the much-respected head of the country’s central bank, Raghuram Rajan. Gideon Rachman discusses the future of prime minister Narendra Modi’s reform programme with the FT’s South Asia bureau chief Amy Kazmin and former Mumbai correspondent James Crabtree

That said, his exit may not necessarily spell doom for a “low inflation future” for India. The full implications will be contingent on the choice of successor and the priorities of the government.

The appointment of an RBI insider such as Dr Urjit Patel would likely assuage investor concerns and ensure policy continuity, with regard to credible inflation targeting. Dr Patel chaired the committee on a new monetary policy framework and has also been instrumental in driving the central bank’s new liquidity policy to enhance monetary policy transmission. 

However, the manner of Mr Rajan’s departure has raised concerns about a more political appointment. Such a development would raise concerns about the independence of the RBI and whether medium-term economic objectives were likely to be sacrificed for short-term growth gains, leading to renewed inflation and currency stability risks.

In short, policy uncertainty is likely to prevail until more clarity emerges on Mr Rajan’s successor. This could worry both short-term and long-term investors.

India’s decision to liberalise FDI across a range of sectors, including defence, has been the other headline-grabbing news on the country this week, and has partly distracted investors from Mr Rajan’s exit. 

Government initiatives such as Make in India have enabled India to reaffirm its position among the top 10 economies globally for FDI inflows, according to the World Investment Report by the United Nations Conference for Trade and Development (Unctad). 

However, the country’s appeal as an investment destination may lose some of its lustre if the low and stable inflation regime, achieved under Mr Rajan’s leadership, is threatened.

Priyanka Kishore is Lead Asia Economist at Oxford Economics

