Scotland’s referendum backing for Remain threatens union

2016-06-24

Scotland’s first minister has said a second independence referendum is now "highly likely" after Scots bucked the national trend and voted for the UK to stay in the EU.

Speaking just hours after the result was declared, Nicola Sturgeon announced legislative preparations to enable a vote that could end the three century Anglo-Scottish political union.

Ms Sturgeon's declaration highlights the potential existential threat to UK unity raised by Thursday's 52 per cent vote in favour of Brexit.

Sharp divisions also emerged between unionist and nationalist leaders in Northern Ireland as the implications of the result begin to sink in.

Scotland backed remaining in the EU by an emphatic margin of 62-38 per cent. In Northern Ireland, 56 per cent of voters opted for remain.

The province’s first minister and Democratic Unionist party leader Arlene Foster, who supported Brexit, on Friday rejected the suggestion by Sinn Féin that there should be a “border poll”, which would be a step towards the reunification of the island of Ireland. People “are quite content with the constitutional position of Northern Ireland within the UK,” she said

Ms Sturgeon said of Scotland’s result, "We proved that we are a modern, outward looking, open and inclusive country. We said clearly that we do not want to leave the European Union." 

"I am determined that we will do what it takes to make sure that these aspirations are realised."

The Scottish National party leader stopped short of committing herself to another referendum, a recognition of the political risks of a second defeat following Scottish voters’ rejection of independence in 2014. But she insisted that Scotland should make preparations that would allow it to hold a referendum before the UK left the EU

The manifesto on which the SNP won a landslide victory in elections to the Scottish parliament last month said that Holyrood “should have the right to hold another referendum” if Scotland is taken out of the EU “against our will”. 

All 32 Scottish local authority areas returned majorities for Remain. Even Shetland and the Western Isles voted to stay in the EU, 41 years after being the only two electoral districts in the UK to vote against membership of the European Common Market.

An independence referendum would be fiercely opposed by many Scots and would require legal approval by the UK parliament, which could be reluctant to grant it given past SNP assurances that the 2014 vote was a “once in a generation event”.

Tom Harris, a former Labour MP and director of the campaign group Scottish Vote Leave, said Westminster could and should block any SNP call for another vote on independence. “There is no case for having another referendum,” Mr Harris said.

But refusing permission would risk further alienating undecided Scottish voters and powers already devolved to Holyrood mean its co-operation is likely to be required for UK legal preparations for Brexit. 

Ms Sturgeon said it was "inconceivable" that the UK could stand in the way of another vote on independence.

Support for Brexit came mainly from disadvantaged parts of England

Despite Ms Sturgeon's tough talk, there are concerns among senior SNP figures that the UK’s exit from the EU will make it harder to persuade Scottish voters of the merits of independence. 

Brexit will force a fundamental rethink of the independence case. Ahead of the 2014 referendum, the SNP promised to continue close economic union with the remainder of the UK — a relationship underpinned by the continued use of the pound and by market access guaranteed by both countries’ EU membership. 

But if it sought to remain in the EU on its own, Scotland could lose the UK’s opt-out from joining the euro and the existing UK rebates. Trading with the rest of Britain, a market vital to the Scottish economy, would be governed by whatever trade agreement London strikes with Brussels. 

The referendum result may well go down in history as ‘the pitchfork moment’

But many Scots who voted to stay in the UK in 2014 have suggested the Brexit vote could change their view.

Harry Potter author J.K. Rowling, in 2014 one of the most articulate defenders of Scotland's place in the UK, on Friday contested a BBC journalist's description of her as a "staunch opponent" of Scottish independence. 

"[That] implies I was pro-union no matter what, which was never the case," Ms Rowling tweeted. "Many No voters will think again now." 

As the shock of the referendum result sank in in Dublin, prime minister Enda Kenny spoken after a marathon cabinet meeting. Looking subdued, he said:

“I am very sorry that the result of the referendum is for the UK to leave the EU. However, the British people have spoken, and we fully respect their decision.

I want to reassure the Irish public that we have prepared to the greatest possible extent for this eventuality.

There will be no immediate change to the free flow of people, goods and services between our islands.”

On Northern Ireland he said: “The implications of this vote for Northern Ireland and for relations between north and south on this island will require careful consideration. These will be a particular priority for the Irish government.”

He said the government will do its utmost to maintain the common travel area between the two islands.

On the negotiations between the UK and the EU that will follow soon: “We must take this breathing space and use it wisely.”

He finished with a personal message for UK prime minister David Cameron. “I wish him the very best for the future” and sent regards to Mr Cameron’s wife and children.

