Brexit vote: Why currency markets were wrongfooted

2016-06-24

The inquest has already begun into how the foreign exchange market managed to make such an overconfident bet on a Remain vote. Whatever the outcome, that appears even now to have been badly unjustified.

A technical explanation is that macro hedge fund managers have had a bad year so far, and may have been desperate to jump the gun, rather than let someone else reap the profits when an expected Remain victory was announced. If Leave does indeed triumph, that implies an elevated risk of a financial accident in the days that come as people try to unwind positions.

Another way to look at this is in terms of what Nassim Taleb has called the “narrative fallacy”. 

Several different factors cohered to create a new narrative last Thursday. Betting markets, watched ever more closely and with a lot of money behind them, reached a peak of belief in a Leave vote (although they never put the chance of Leave above 50 per cent, despite a lead for Leave in many polls). At this point they were ready to turn. 

At the same time, currency markets reached a psychological or technical barrier — $1.40 to the pound. This level has only been breached a handful of times, and only ever very briefly, since the Plaza Accord in 1985. Traders had to ask themselves whether they were prepared to take sterling lower.

Finally there was the awful news of the killing of Jo Cox, the British member of parliament. This tragic event looked at the time like a cathartic turning point. Traders may have been too keen to treat it as such, and so the rush was on to put money on an ultimate Remain vote. It fit a convenient narrative that many could believe. And so the bet was on.

As it stands, even if Remain emerges triumphant, this referendum looks like a reversal of the last national UK vote. Then, there was embarrassment for pollsters, and relative success for bookies and prediction markets. This time the polls, which continued to show a very tight race, are looking much smarter than the betting and currency markets, which allowed themselves to overshoot.

The writer is the FT’s Senior Investment Commentator

