Virgin Media owner gives £700,000 to campaign against Brexit

2016-06-16

Mike Fries, the chief executive of Liberty Global, has warned that the company would seriously reconsider future capital investment in the UK if Britain votes to leave the EU. 

Liberty Global, which owns Virgin Media in the UK, has pledged its support for the Remain camp and on Thursday shareholders overwhelmingly approved a donation of up to £700,000.

The donation is one of the largest made by the corporate sector and accounts for almost 10 per cent of the maximum amount the Remain campaign can spend.

But with the Leave camp edging ahead in the polls, Mr Fries told the Financial Times that a decision to leave the EU would create unnecessary political, regulatory and economic uncertainty.

“We will probably deploy capital elsewhere,” he said. “We are a multinational that has plenty of opportunities to create value for shareholders and we will always seek the highest return; that’s our job.”

Liberty Global’s UK cable operation Virgin Media, which employs more than 14,000 people in Britain, is investing £3bn in upgrading the broadband network for 4m homes.

Mr Fries said that while that particular project was “too far down the road” to stop, Liberty would have to think hard about whether to launch similar capital programmes if the UK voted for Brexit.

He said: “Would we undertake that sort of commitment again? We would have to question that.”

In the event of a recession caused by a vote for Brexit, Liberty Global fears that consumers might be less willing to continue to invest in cable services.

“It could be a mild cold or a total flu. But it is enough of a worry for us to be putting our money behind Remain,” he added.

In a further sign of Liberty’s commitment to the Remain campaign, Virgin Media chief executive Tom Mockridge last month sent an impassioned email to all staff outlining the case to stay. 

“Over the past 40 years, I have lived and worked in many different countries around the world and my view is very simply that the UK is stronger, more secure and, ultimately, will continue to be more successful as a member of the EU,” he wrote.

With just a week to go to the vote, it is unclear what impact Liberty Global’s six-figure donation will have at this late stage of the campaign. But the company said that the money would be partly used to target younger voters on social media who could yet turn the vote against the Leave camp.

