Dad’s fury after Asda shopper posts note on car saying his England flags are RACIST

2016-6-21

A FOOTBALL mad dad has been left shell-shocked after he was called RACIST for decorating his car in England flags for Euro 2016.

Jonny Cooke, 35, was at Asda when his England-themed silver Ford Fiesta was planted with a note under his windscreen wipers reading: 'Pathetic Racist B******s with your England flags'.

But a vexed Jonny had only decorated the car with the England flags for his son Ben, seven, and 14-month-old daughter Laila to enjoy.

Jonny was out with fiancée Jessica, 32,  and the kids when he spotted the note, which he slammed as “wrong”, “hurtful” and “unneccessarily spreading hatred”.

The 35-year-old mental health support worker said: “I was coming back to my car when I spotted a note left under my windscreen wipers.

“At first I thought someone might have scraped my car, but when I read it I was shocked.

“My son Ben was asking ‘What does it say, Daddy?’ so I just had to tell him it was someone being silly.”

Jonny attached the flags to his passenger seat windows in support of England during the Euro Championships, following the requests of his children.

 

He reacted by sharing the vitriolic note on Facebook to shame the mystery shopper.

In the post Jonny, of Leeds, West Yorks., wrote: "Whoever stuck this on my windscreen at the Asda at the top of Huddersfield YOU are a Disgrace!!

"How is supporting my country & having children who like flags being racist if I find out who this is I will take this further.

"I urge anyone who saw this placed on my windscreen or recognise the handwriting let me know please."

The note was left between 2.30pm and 3.15pm on Saturday and Jonny is trying to find out who is responsible.

Jonny added: "I'm going to ask for CCTV footage from Asda - I will find out who you are."

But fellow social media users were equally shocked by the post, with some suggesting he take the incident up with Asda and the police.

Jonny added: “I think emotions are high with the football and the EU referendum but it’s a very hurtful thing to call someone racist.

“It’s just unnecessary hatred.”

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

