Could there be a second EU referendum?

2016-6-21

SICK to the back teeth of the EU debate? Can’t wait for it all to be over on June 23?

Well if some leading Brexiteers have their way we could have a ‘Neverendum’ on our hands.

The spectre of a second referendum has been raised by a series of Leavers over the campaign. But why?


Nigel Farage has claimed a narrow win for Remain would leave “unfinished business” for Eurosceptic Tory MPs.

"In a 52-48 referendum this would be unfinished business by a long way. If the Remain campaign win two-thirds to one-third that ends it," he said.

The Ukip leader said a close loss would lead to calls of foul play from bitter Brexit-backing MPs. From the very beginning of campaigning they have complained about the Government’s unfair tactics after it splashed £9.3million on a pro-EU leaflet.

Boris Johnson has since accused the Remain campaign of an “establishment stitch-up” after the Bank of England, the IMF and every living British PM has agreed the UK would be better placed within the EU.


Former Tory leader Michael Howard is the most credible Leave figure to have raised the prospect of a second referendum.

He claimed by Britain voting to leave the EU, it could “shake EU leaders out of their complacency” and offer the UK better terms to stay.

Boris Johnson is also said to have favoured this “double referendum strategy” but he has since dismissed the claims.

The argument goes that in the frenzied panic following a Leave vote, EU leaders would beg the UK to stay in the club.


David Cameron has said the idea was “for the birds” and EU leaders have said bluntly that there are “no second chances” if the UK leaves.

While European Council president Donald Tusk talked tough at first, just last week he claimed Brexit would destroy not only the EU but also “Western political civilisation”.

Was this Project Fear turned up to 11 or a sign of how desperate the EU would be to keep Britain in the bloc?

There is a fear within the EU that if Britain is afforded any more special treatment it will be a red rag to other disgruntled member states to charge in demanding concessions.

Either way the main hurdle for a second referendum comes down to the EU referendum ballot paper.

It gives no mandate for the UK to return to the negotiating table: It is a choice between Leave and Remain.

