Germany says it will admit Geoff Hurst’s 1966 final goal was in – if Brits vote Remain in EU referendum

2016-6-23

THE GERMANS will finally say Geoff Hurst’s controversial second goal at the 1966 World Cup did cross the line – but there’s a catch.

They will only acknowledge it Britain votes to stay in the EU, according to Germany’s biggest-selling newspaper.

Bild has launched into a last minute charm offensive as millions of Brits head to polling booths across the country.

The German red-top also promised they would use their towels to reserve sun loungers for BRITS – as they pleaded with voters to stay in the EU.

Other promises it has made include enforcing an EU directive that prohibits foam on beer, provide a villain for every Bond film and stop making fun on Prince Charles’ ears.

For a nation not famed for its sense of humour, Bild’s Manifesto of 11 ‘bribes’ added Germany would also introduce tea time – and take its keeper off the pitch for the next penalty shoot-out.

Inside the paper Bild added that it had bet £10,000 on Remain winning the Referendum, and said it would spend the winnings on investing in ‘German-British friendship’ by getting the drinks in at a London pub.

The love bombing is the latest international attempt to persuade Brits to stay with the EU. The Irish Independent yesterday urged voters to back Remain – despite admitting the UK can “legitimately gripe about its view not being treated with due respect by Brussels”.

In China, the Global Times controlled by the ruling Communist Party, warned Britain would lose its influence worldwide if it votes Out.

We’ll acknowledge the Wembley goal

We’ll stop making jokes about Prince Charles’s ears

We’ll stop using sun cream on the beach out of solidarity with your sunburn

We’ll reserve a place with our towels for you on the hotel sun-lounger

We’ll introduce tea breaks

We’ll turn our clocks back an hour to be in synch with you

We’ll do without a goalie in penalty shoot-outs with you to make it a bit more exciting

We’ll send (German national football manager) Joachim Low to guard your Crown Jewels

We’ll introduce an EU regulation banning a frothy head on beer

We’ll all come along to the Queen’s 100th birthday

We’ll willingly provide the villain in every Bond film

