Boris’s last push for Brexit sees him kissing fish and posing for selfies in a gruelling final day of campaigning

2016-6-22

BORIS Johnson kissed fish and posed for selfies on a gruelling whirlwind tour of England in a final push for Brexit - as a new poll put Leave in the lead.

The Vote Leave standard bearer travelled hundreds of miles during a frenetic last day of campaigning before the EU referendum tomorrow.

As well as being a vote for Britain he told supporters that voters had a chance to stand up for “hundreds of millions” of people in Europe who were angry with Brussels.

As the day unfolded an Opinium survey of 3,000 voters this week found 45 per cent backed Leave and 44 per cent backed Remain.

Mr Johnson was up early kissing fish in Billingsgate Market with Joey Essex’s uncle Greg, who works as a porter there, as he argued the UK can “take back control” of its taxes, democracy, immigration if we vote to quit Brussels.

He said: “We should believe in our country, believe in what we can do.

“Take back control and vote leave.

“It would be independence day for this country. So I hope people do it.”

During his 7.30am stop the top Tory also took a swipe at the rival Remain campaign, saying it has been offering “nothing but fear”.

By 9.30am the former mayor of London was on a visit to Maldon, Essex, where he told activists: “I do think that we are on the verge, possibly, of an extraordinary event in the history of our country and indeed in the whole of Europe."

In between posing for selfies and signed autographs he told them if all the Brexit supporters come out to vote then tomorrow really can be Britain’s independence day.

Next up was a walkabout in Ashby-de-la-Zouch, Leicestershire, where he was heckled by a 17-year-old Remain supporter but got a lot of love from passing motorists.

Travelling the country by road and air he definitely enjoyed himself in the helicopter and Herald Scotland reports he quipped “Let’s put on Ride of the Valkyries” in a reference to the film Apocalypse Now.

Arriving in Selby, North Yorkshire, at about 3.40pm there was a lot of time to meet supporters and pose for selfies.

In a stirring speech he said people need to take this opportunity to vote Leave: “This will not come again.

“Vote Leave tomorrow, take back control of our country and our democracy and stick up for hundreds of millions of people around Europe who agree with us, who agree that the EU is going in the wrong direction."

After a hard-fought day of campaigning Mr Johnson had a well-earned pint at The George pub at Piercebridge near Darlington, County Durham.

Raising his glass and saying cheers to a great campaign he told supporters to “drive for the line”.

