Surprise surprise! George Osborne ally Bill Gates backs pro-EU campaign

2016-6-17

THE world’s richest man Bill Gates has warned he would plough less cash into the UK if it leaves the EU.

The Microsoft billionaire said Brexit would make Britain a "significantly less attractive place to do business and invest".

And he even suggested the UK going it alone could make it harder to beat “future epidemics”.

The tycoon and philanthropist – who has invested nearly £700 million in Britain – said tackling disease and climate change “will require more cooperation, not less”.

He said: “Europe is stronger with Britain in it; and likewise Britain is stronger, more prosperous and more influential as a member of the European Union.”

The entrepreneur praised Britain’s leadership in research and innovation but said the country would lose ground under a Brexit as it would struggle to attract the best international talent.

In a letter to The Times he said: “While ultimately a matter for the British people to decide it is clear to mee that if Britain chooses to be outside of Europe, it will be a significantly less attractive place to do busenss and to invest

“It will be harder to find and recruit the best talent from across the continent; talent which, in turn, creates jobs for local people in the UK.”

 

The intervention will draw yet more accusations of an establishment stitch-up from Leave campaigners as the tech tycoon has been a close ally of the Government in recent years.

He even filmed a video for last year’s Tory party conference and has hailed David Cameron as a "true leader".

 

Mr Gates said the access to the single market and the UK’s reputation for pioneering research led Microsoft to set up a leading research lab in Cambridge.

Microsoft came out for staying in the EU last month - but insisted its “commitment” to 3,500 staff in Cambridge remained “firm”.

The renowned philanthropist added that Britain had a “strong influence" at the negotiating table thanks to its membership.

Mr Gates was pictured in January alongside George Osborne after the Chancellor announced British taxpayers would cough up most of the £3billion for a join project to wipe out Malaria within decades.

Bill Gates’ blast follows a battle from both the Remain and Leave campaigns to sign up top entrepreneurs for their cause.

Last week British inventor Sir James Dyson came out for Brexit and said it was “cobblers” no one would trade with Britain if we left the EU.

His intervention came just days after JCB boss Lord Bamford insisted Britain was more than able to stand on its own and two feet and “prosper” outside of the EU.

Consultants yesterday claimed big business was more worried about a Brexit than smaller firms. Charterhouse Research said 62 per cent of companies with a turnover of £25 million or more think leaving the EU would hit the economy. But just 38 per cent of start-ups believed it would be bad.

 

