Study shows ordinary folk believe they are losers under the EU while the wealthy prosper

2016-6-17

BRITAIN’S EU membership is seen as much more beneficial to the well off than to poorer workers, a survey has found.

The SurveyMonkey poll of 3,553 voters also showed the referendum fight is still on a knife edge.

It found the nation split right down the middle in its support for Remain and Leave, with both on 48% of support.

Quizzed on who had done best under the EU, a major class divide opened up — famously satirised in 1966 by The Frost Report, starring John Cleese, Ronnie Barker and Ronnie Corbett.

While 39 per cent agree “working class individuals” had been helped by Brussels, 25 per cent believe it had made no difference to them, and 33 per cent reckoned it had hurt them.

When asked about the effect on “upper class individuals”, a clear majority of 51 per cent said the EU had helped with just seven per cent saying they had been hurt by it.

Another 37 per cent thought it made no difference.

US-based internet pollster SurveyMonkey was the only polling firm to accurately predict last year’s General Election result for the Tories.

By a ratio of 2-to-1, more British voters told it UK businesses were helped rather than hurt by our EU membership.

The survey also found a one in five admitted they may still change their mind before Thursday’s landmark referendum.

That means there are as many as 4.5million votes still to be won over in the next five days, meaning there is still all to play for.

Women are most uncertain, with 22 per cent still wobbling compared to 17 per cent of men.

Nearly a third of all Brits singled out immigration as the No1 issue in the referendum.

The NHS is next along with poverty and inequality on 14 per cent each, followed by the economy on 13 per cent.

A majority of Conservative voters side with Leave by a 21-point margin, where as more than two thirds of Labour supporters back Remain.

SurveyMonkey chief research officer Jon Cohen said: “The best shot for advocates of continuing British membership of the EU may be to expand the number of issues on voters’ minds beyond the narrow membership question and the broader immigration issue.”

The SurveyMonekey findings follow five polls in a row this week that gave Leave a lead of between four and eight points.

A ComRes poll for The Sun on Wednesday gave Remain a tiny two point lead by 51 per cent to 49 per cent.

In a separate poll carried out by the Times Education Supplement, it has emerged that teachers will overwhelmingly vote to keep Britain in the EU by 70 per cent to 23 per cent.

Meanwhile betting markets saw a small boost for Remain yesterday as its chances began to climb again to 63 per cent, with Leave chances decreasingly slightly to 37 per cent.

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368.

 

