Brussels bigwig Jean-Claude warns Britain there’s ‘no second chance’ if UK turns backs Brexit

2016-6-22

EUROPEAN Union boss Jean-Claude Juncker risked infuriating British voters by threatening to isolate us if we vote to leave the EU.

The European Commission president was joined by other ­leaders to insist that there would be no second deal on offer to the UK if it chooses Brexit.

Every time a member country has voted down a new EU treaty or plan in the past, it has always been offered better terms.

But the UK would not be, Mr Juncker declared, saying instead: “Out is out.”

In another explosive outburst, the federalist chief Eurocrat also questioned whether it was right to hold referendums at all.

Senior Tories slammed the explosive statement on the eve of the poll as “unbelievable conceit”.

But Mr Juncker also appeared to close the door on any further reforms to the EU’s free movement rules — pledged by the PM to Sun readers on Tuesday — even if the UK votes to remain In.

The commission boss said David Cameron had already “got the maximum” with his renegotiation in February, panned by Conservative MPs as “thin gruel”.

Former Luxembourg PM Mr Juncker insisted: “British voters have to know that there will not be any kind of renegotiation.

“We have concluded a deal with the Prime Minister, he got the ­maximum he could receive, we gave the maximum we could give.”

Continuing his Brussels rant, arrogant Mr Juncker also slammed the mere idea of giving people a say.

Admitting he is “basically not a big fan of referendums”, Mr Juncker added: “Voters can be easily misled by sideshows.

“You always get the sweats when someone dares to ask the people for its opinion.”

He also admitted Brexit would “damage” the EU project, adding: “The British need the EU and the EU needs British pragmatism.”

France’s President Hollande backed up the rant yesterday by also insisting there would be no second deal if voters back Brexit.

He claimed “the future of the European Union is at stake”.

The Socialist leader dubbed today’s landmark referendum “irreversible”, parroting Mr Cameron’s campaign mantra.

Issuing a new veiled threat, Mr Hollande also said Brexit would put Britain at “very serious risk” of losing access to the European Union bloc’s single market.

While reinforcing Mr Cameron’s message, the stern last-minute warnings could also backfire on the Remain campaign if they encourage voters across the country to rebel against the EU’s elite.

Leave campaigners seized on the threats to insist the Prime Minister was wrong to offer British voters false hope of more EU reform.

Brexit campaign boss and Justice Secretary Michael Gove said: “If you vote to stay, there is no prospect of getting any reform from the EU ever again.

“The Prime Minister tried to get reforms earlier this year but the EU did not listen.”

Mr Gove added: “The EU cannot and will not give the British people the change that they want.”

Furious Boris Johnson weighed in, saying: “The president of the European Commission has basically just told David Cameron to bog off.

“We’ve already been given the maximum we’re going to get? This is unbelievable, the conceit of these people, what gives him the right?

“This isn’t a head of state, this isn’t the head of an elected government.”

The former London Mayor added: “Who in the holy **** elected Jean Claude Juncker to anything?

“He used to run Luxembourg, it’s a lovely place but about the same size as Wolverhampton.”

German leader Angela Merkel held back from an eleventh hour threat after a plea from Downing Street to stay out of the fight four weeks ago.

Instead Mrs Merkel issued a plea to voters to back Remain, saying: “Of course I want Britain to stay in the EU but the decision is with British citizens.”

On Tuesday, Mr Cameron urged Sun readers to back Britain staying in the EU so he could reform it from within.

The Prime Minister claimed: “If we stay in, that is not the end of reform.

“Britain will be in a very enhanced position.”

