Heartbreaking moment Canadian MP and friend of Jo Cox breaks down in tears in Parliament as tributes pour in from around the world to murdered MP

2016-6-17

A TEARFUL Canadian MP broke down in Parliament as he led tributes from around the world to his friend Jo Cox, murdered in her constituency yesterday.

In an emotional statement Nathan Cullen described the slain mother-of-two as a dedicated MP and a powerful advocate of human rights across the globe.

He said: “Jo used her voice for those who have none.

“She dedicated her passion to those who needed it most and she harnessed her limitless love, even and especially for those who allowed hate to consume them.”

His voice cracking up, he paused before composing himself to pay tribute to the 41-year-old, who was shot and stabbed repeatedly in her constituency yesterday.

Mr Cullen, the MP for Skeena-Bulkley Valley, said: "Her husband Brendan said it beautifully: 'She would have wanted two things above all else to happen now, that our children are bathed in love and that we all unite to fight against the hatred that killed her.'

"To Brendan, to Jo's beautiful children, we express our deepest condolences."

The pair had met at a conference in Washington DC three years ago, and had kept in touch ever since.

Mr Cullen’s was one of a number of tributes to Mrs Cox from leading politicians across the world following her shocking murder on a suburban street in West Yorkshire.

Hillary Clinton described her as a “rising star”, and said he was “horrified” by the MP’s assassination.

In a statement the Presidential candidate said: “Her maiden speech in Parliament celebrated the diversity of her beloved Yorkshire constituency, and passionately made the case that there is more that unites us than divides us.

"It is cruel and terrible that her life was cut short by a violent act of political intolerance" —Hillary on Jo Cox: https://t.co/FUShBg11it

“It is cruel and terrible that her life was cut short by a violent act of political intolerance.”

She said American and Britain “should stand together against hatred and violence”, and  said we must honour Jo Cox “by rejecting bigotry in all its forms”.

“My thoughts and prayers are with her friends, her family, and the British people,” she added.

Canada’s Prime Minister, Justin Trudeau, tweeted a message saying: "On behalf of our Parliament and all Canadians, I offer my deepest condolences to the family and colleagues of British MP Jo Cox."

Malcolm Turnbull, the Australian PM, said: “Deeply shocked by the murder of UK MP Jo Cox.

“Our condolences, prayers and solidarity are with her family & the people of the UK.”

In Berlin German Chancellor #Merkel called #JoCox's death "terrible and dramatic". pic.twitter.com/QgI0qc5bl6

On behalf of our Parliament and all Canadians, I offer my deepest condolences to the family and colleagues of British MP Jo Cox.

What an appalling tragedy. Jo Cox, a mother doing her public duty, her life taken away. My deepest sympathies to her family.

Former Congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords, who survived an assassination attempt, also tweeted her condolences.

She said: “Absolutely sickened to hear of the assassination of Jo Cox.

“She was young, courageous, and hardworking. A rising star, mother, and wife.”

Irish Prime Minister Enda Kenny called it “an appalling tragedy”, and tweeted that he was cancelling a speech on the EU referendum.

His French counterpart Manuel Valls said he was "deeply sad for Mrs Cox's family and the British people".

Τhe murder of @UKLabour MP @Jo_Cox1 is shocking. Hatred and nationalism are common enemies of our people. #JoCox

Deeply shocked by the murder of UK MP Jo Cox. Our condolences, prayers and solidarity are with her family & the people of the UK.

Absolutely sickened to hear of the assassination of Jo Cox. She was young, courageous, and hardworking. A rising star, mother, and wife.

The female mayor of Cologne - stabbed in the neck by a refugee-hating extremist as she campaigned for her job - also expressed her sympathies.

“The death of Jo Cox has really affected me. Xenophobic slogans inevitably lead to violence,” tweeted Henriette Reker, who barely survived the assault on her.

“We all bear responsibility that such a situation never happens again in Germany or in Europe,” she added.

And Danish prime minister Lars Lokke Rasmussen described the killing as "a true shock".

A 52-year-old man has been arrested in connection with the incident and is being held in custody.

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368.

 

