Angry MPs demand security overhaul after Jo Cox murder… claiming voters had become ‘more aggressive’

2016-6-17

ANGRY MPs last night demanded a security review in the wake of Jo Cox’s tragic death – claiming voters had become “more aggressive”.

As tributes poured in for the mother-of-two, Labour’s Barry Sheerman said many MPs were more worried and stressed about their own safety than they used to be.

He said: “It is a worry that there is a small section of our constituents, most of our constituents are wonderful, but there is a very small element that has become, I think, more aggressive.”

Labour’s Anna Turley added that while police patrolled the Houses of Parliament with guns, MPs were only given a “personal fob” or safety alarm as they walk the streets or meet voters in their constituencies.

She said: “There’s got to be some ground in-between that, where we know we’ve got some kind of security if something starts to go wrong. We have to explore this.”

The call came as others privately blasted Commons security officials for failing to act following an internal report last year which revealed MPs’ fears about a lack of protection from people with “knives and guns” and mental health issues.

In August an internal Commons report revealed female MPs were worried that curbs on their allowances meant they had to base their constituency offices in cheaper, out of town or run-down areas.

The report said: “This has potential implications for the security of staff who were often working alone or in pairs.”

It added: “A few MPs gave examples of incidents involving stalkers and those with knives and guns, which although not just issues for women, were ones where some women felt they were more vulnerable.”

There has also been growing concern at MPs vulnerability given the terror threat and the vitriolic abuse politicians suffer on social media sites such as Twitter.

The parliamentary pay watchdog in January announced an “enhanced” package for politicians in their constituencies to help them afford alarms, locks and CCTV.

But MPs last night told The Sun that Commons security staff “batted off” concerns to local constabularies.

One said: “Advice was basic things like improve your office.

“No changes were made to surgeries except from recommending stuff like moving to appointment only.”

Labour’s Shadow Environment Secretary Kerry McCarthy yesterday said she would be looking at “what more can be done”.

She said: “As MPs, we are in a vulnerable position. But my particular concern is about protecting my staff.

“Staff are in the office more than I am as I’m here, there and everywhere and often in London.”

Jo is the first MP murdered in office since  1990 when Ian Gow became the last in a string of MPs to die at the hands of Northern Irish terror groups.

Sir Anthony Berry died in the IRA bombing of Brighton’s Grand Hotel at the 1984 Conservative conference.

The IRA also claimed the life of Ulster Unionist Party MP Robert Bradford in 1981.

And the Irish National Liberation Army  murdered  Airey Neave with a car bomb in 1979.

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368.

 

