Cake firm boss leads legion of businesses calling for country to leave Europe

2016-6-19

THIRTY-SEVEN top business chiefs led by cake-chain boss Luke Johnson today call on Britain to quit the “energy-sapping” EU.

Mr Johnson, who runs the French-style cafe chain Patisserie Valerie, and the other high-flyers are backing Brexit ahead of Thursday’s referendum.

The self-starters claim small firms will thrive once freed from the Brussels “straitjacket”.

In a letter to The Sun on Sunday, they warn the eurozone destroys “white van man” style enterprises.

Their intervention is a major boost for the Brexit campaign as the In/Out vote approaches.

The 37 entrepreneurs have all become major market players after turning an original idea or a small family firm into top wealth-creators, outperforming FTSE 100 giants.

They say: “This was achieved in spite of the EU, not because of it.”

 

Mr Johnson, 54, turned Pizza Express from a chain of 12 restaurants to more than 250 today before taking on Patisserie Valerie.

Lined up with him for Brexit are Superdrug founder Peter Goldstein, Toby Baxendale of Direct Seafoods and James Tanner of Tanners Wine.

John Mills of retail promotions firm JML and Stuart Wheeler of finance company IG have also thrown their weight behind the move. Their letter adds: “We’re confident that, unburdened by the energy-sapping European project, British inventiveness, flexibility and thoroughness will see the country thrive outside the EU.

“These attributes will ensure that our economic performance continues to outstrip that of the rest of the EU bloc.”

Mr Johnson said: “The EU lacks democracy. This legislation and regulation it likes to create isn’t good for job creation.”

Mr Goldstein, who founded Superdrug with his brother Ronald in 1964, claims the EU “stifles growth”.

He said: “Since we joined, slowly, slowly, slowly, we have lost our power base. The end game is to be where we were — a free, independent and democratic country.”

 

[scribd id=316106361 key=key-1stKvVbg3Paq10Us2qjX mode=scroll]

