Oscar Pistorius’ only interview to Glasto-coverage and extreme body makeovers: What to watch on TV this week

2016-6-20

IT'S a veritable feast of telly delights this week, as Ferne McCann gets grilled on hilarious panel show Safeword and Jeremy Paxman gets political on the eve of the EU Referendum.

Casualty celebrates it’s 1,000th – yes, 1,000th! – episode with the return of a very special star, while Oscar Pistorius gives his only interview to ITV on the week of his sentencing for murdering girlfriend Reeva Steenkamp in 2013.

And our movie pick of the week is the award-drenched Life of Pi.

Why bother going out at all?


Body Freaks: Make Me Perfect

How far would you go in the pursuit of body perfection?

This one-off documentary follows the stories of British people hooked on risky cosmetic procedures.

Sam, 24, from Birmingham had Botox aged 17 as well as fillers, micro-dermabrasion and liposuction. He’s spent £20k on his teeth alone.

Meanwhile, 29-year-old Jacqui from Worcester is a selfie-addict suffering from a ruptured breast implant and body-building twins Delroy and Trevor each take three hours to get ready to leave the house.

Extreme, much?

10pm, C5

Europe: The Final Debate with Jeremy Paxman

It's make your mind up time for what could be the most important decision many people will ever take at the ballot box.

On the eve of the EU Referendum, Jeremy Paxman is joined by politicians including Boris Johnson and Sadiq Khan as well as celebrities and high-profile men and women from business, science, sport, and the military and security services.

9pm, Channel 4

Safeword

Rick Edwards hosts the panel show where only the bravest celebrities compete…

This week, England's Grand Slam winning rugby star James Haskell goes head to head with ex-TOWIE girl and I'm A Celebrity campmate Ferne McCann as they have their social media accounts hijacked and their professional lives poked by team captains Katherine Ryan and David Morgan, alongside comics Dane Baptiste and Stephen Bailey.

10pm, ITV2

Oscar Pistorius: The Interview

The former Paralympic and Olympic athlete, Oscar Pistorius, has given his first TV interview after being convicted for the murder of his girlfriend Reeva Steenkamp on Valentine's Day in 2013.

Pistorius’ sentencing began on Monday and this interview was taped the previous week.

Journalist Mark Williams-Thomas was granted the exclusive, one-off, hour-long interview.

Pistorius will discuss preparing to return to jail after his original conviction of culpable homicide was upgraded to second-degree murder by South Africa’s Supreme Court.

9pm, ITV

Life of Pi

Ang Lee’s 2012 masterpiece is an adaptation of Yann Martel’s novel of the same name.

It scooped four Academy Awards including Best Director, as well as a Golden globe for Best Original Score.

Starring Suraj Sharma, Rafe Spall, Gerard Depardieu – and some seriously impressive visual effects – the story centres on Indian man, Pi, telling a novelist his own lie story and how, at 16, he survived a shipwreck and was stranded at sea on a lifeboat with a Bengal Tiger.

The perfect Saturday night movie to settle into.

8pm, Channel 4 

Casualty

In a special 1,000th episode of Casualty, an old friend pops down from the obstetrics and gynecology department and reveals to Charlie that they are back working as an agency nurse in Holby. Who could it be?!

Meanwhile, Elle enters the hospital with her head held high, but with the Emergency Department still bitter towards her, the team slyly sends all the worst cases her way. Can she earn their respect by saving a mother and her unborn child?

Rita is telling everyone that she and Iain are back together, and Iain is freaking out. He decides to come clean, and tells her he doesn’t want a relationship.

Glen visits the mortality café again, and a romance blossoms between him and Robyn.
9pm, BBC One - time and date may change due to Euro 2016 

Glastonbury

BBC Four is showing all Glasto-coverage from the weekend.

Tonight, on the festival’s last night, tune in to watch live performances on the mighty Pyramid Stage of Ellie Goulding and Gregory Porter.

Other musical treats such as PJ Harvey, Years & Years, Earth, Wind & Fire, Cyndi Lauper and KT Tunstall will also be live-streamed, from six key music stages in the mammoth festival.

8pm, BBC Four 

