Furious Brussels chiefs demand Britain gets on with leaving the EU as soon as possible

2016-6-24

FURIOUS Brussels chiefs today demanded Britain get on with leaving the EU as furious bureaucrats threatened “consequences” for the Brexit vote.

In a joint statement, the PM was urged to invoke Article 50 – effectively Britain’s resignation letter – as soon as possible to kick-start talks over a departure.

David Cameron signalled the UK would not be in a position to begin divorce negotiations until a new PM is in Downing Street this October.

Commission President Jean Claude Juncker and EU Council chief Donald Tusk said: “This is an unprecedented situation but we are now united in our response.

“We now expect the United Kingdom government to give effect to this decision of the British people as soon as possible, however painful that process may be.

“Any delay would unnecessarily prolong uncertainty.”

Britain remains a member of the EU with all the rights - and obligations – until the process of negotiations over the terms of a departure is settled.

Invoking Article 50 begins a two-year period of talks to try and thrash out terms.

Earlier this morning European Parliament chief Martin Schulz threatened to hit Britain with “consequences” – to show other EU member states they should not follow the UK out of the door.

And Liberal MEP Guy Verhofstadt tore into David Cameron – saying it was “unacceptable” to delay Britain’s departure.

The former Belgian PM blasted: “I find it unacceptable what he said that he is going to wait until October and hand it over to his successor.

“That means concretely that it would be possible that in the whole 2016 there is no British notification of the decision."

But other EU leaders called for unity.

Speaking before the joint statement, EU Council chief Donald Tusk said that while the Brexit was a “historical” moment it was “not a moment for hysterical reactions”.

On leaving a press conference, he quipped: “What doesn’t kill you makes you stronger.”

Angela Merkel revealed EU leaders would hold an emergency summit next week before a scheduled EU Council meeting which David Cameron will attend.

The German Chancellor expressed “great regret” at the UK’s decision to leave the EU but insisted the bloc was “strong enough” to find the “right answers”.

