Boris Johnson gives his vision of post-Brexit Britain in rallying cry for independence

2016-6-19

BULLISH Boris Johnson last night outlined his vision of a post-Brexit Britain and declared: “This is our moment.”

The Tory MP said people have nothing to fear by “backing ourselves” and voting to leave the EU on Thursday.

And he revealed the immediate steps he would take to break the nation free from the shackles he says have held us back for 40 years.

In a rallying call, he said: “This is it now. Let’s do this thing.

“Later this week we’ll have a once in a lifetime opportunity. This is our moment when the British people take centre stage in history.

“The eyes of Europe will be on us and hundreds of millions of people will be praying that we do the right thing and vote for change.

This is our moment when the British people take centre stage

“If we do this, we’ll be speaking up for democracy not only in Britain but throughout Europe and it will be a fine thing that will echo through the ages.”

Mr Johnson said several of the worst EU ties could be broken off within days — even before talks about full withdrawal have started.

His first action would be to withdraw from the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice, putting full rule of law back into the hands of our own judges.

Next he would make preparations for the return of our annual contributions, leaving millions of pounds more for British ministers to spend.

Seizing back control of our borders would be the third major act, with a points-based immigration system devised that would be fair to people from across the world.

But BoJo insisted the first and most crucial act in the hours after Brexit is to make clear and cogent statements about Britain’s new place in Europe.

The most important thing first of all is that David Cameron should stay on as Prime Minister

The former London Mayor said: “The most important thing first of all is that David Cameron should stay on as Prime Minister — and I am sure he will.

“He will need to send a very powerful message to our European friends and partners that this is not a vote against Europe. It will be a vote against the institutions of the European Union.

“Britain must send a powerful signal that we remain committed to partnership and friendship with our friends and partners and that should be done very soon.”

Steps towards full divorce from the EU could be taken “fairly rapidly”, he added, without starting the full exit process by invoking Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty.

Mr Johnson gave a glimpse of the changes ahead as he launched into the last lap of the referendum campaign, following a three-day suspension due to the killing of MP Jo Cox.

He will criss-cross the country in a helicopter to get across his message to undecided voters.

This is a once-in-a-lifetime chance to take back control of our democracy from an unelected, undemocratic, unaccountable and unreformed European Union

On polling day, he will be in Scotland attending his daughter Lara’s graduation ceremony before returning to London. In an exclusive interview with The Sun on Sunday, he said: “This is a once-in-a-lifetime chance to take back control of our democracy from an unelected, undemocratic, unaccountable and unreformed European Union.

“We are working flat out to achieve this. It’s a chance to take back control of huge sums of money and to take back control of our trade policy. There’s a massive opportunity for Britain. We should be full of excitement and hope about what can be achieved.

“This country has never gone wrong by believing in itself and trusting in its democratic institutions.

“That is what is at stake. This week is about whether we believe in British democracy or are content to see it steadily eroded and lost to unaccountable, unelected people overseas.”

Mr Johnson insisted the Tory party — and the country — can pull back together again once the matter has been settled.

Though insisting Mr Cameron should stay as PM, he warned him against axing fellow Brexiteer Michael Gove from the Cabinet. “David has my full confidence,” he stressed. “Don’t forget I was one of the first people to back him for the leadership in 2005.

This week is about whether we believe in British democracy or are content to see it steadily eroded and lost to unaccountable, unelected people overseas

“He was the best person for the job then and he is now. I think he will survive, whatever the outcome. There are a lot of people signing letters saying they want him to stay on — and Michael Gove as well.

“In these campaigns, you always expect things to get energetic from time to time. But people need to get back together again and continue a one-nation Conservative agenda.”

Mr Johnson, who is expected to get a Cabinet post in the next reshuffle, said his own future was irrelevant.

He also defended the heavy focus on immigration by the Leave campaign and blamed free movement partly for the rise of extremism.

He said: “As you know, I’m pro-immigration. I’m the proud descendant of Turks. My family is like a genetic version of a UN peace-keeping force.

“We come from everywhere, but I believe passionately that people should become British and also that you should have a policy that is fair and balanced.

There is nothing to be afraid of. There will be no giant earthquake on Friday morning

“The other reason for taking back control is that I don’t like extremism. I don’t like the far-Right parties that you see coming up across Europe.

“I am a very moderate liberal Conservative but I think that the problem with immigration is that politicians have promised they can control it when legally they can’t because we are in the EU. You can only spike the guns of the extremists and the people who are genuinely anti-immigrant if you take back control.”

He added: “There is nothing to be afraid of. There will be no giant earthquake on Friday morning.

“The only economic outcome you will see is that people on low wages will gradually get a pay rise.

“Sun on Sunday readers won’t go wrong believing in Britain, as I know they do. The fundamental question is, do we trust ourselves to govern ourselves or do we want to be increasingly run by people we don’t elect?

“This is a great opportunity and it would be a shame if we missed it. That’s why I will be out there this week telling everybody the same message: ‘We can do it. Let’s do it’.”

