Polls swing to remain in wake of murdered MP Jo as more voters make up their minds

2016-6-19

A THREE-POINT lead opened up for Remain last night in the wake of the murder of Labour MP Jo Cox.

A Survation poll on Friday and yesterday put the pro-EU camp on 45 per cent and Leave on 42.

It reverses a Survation survey on Thursday that saw Leave on 45 per cent, three points ahead.

And a ComRes poll released last night revealed voters had dramatically swung towards Remain following the shooting.

Analysts quizzed people about the referendum as news broke of the attack on the 41-year-old on Thursday.

Before the mum-of-two was killed, 45 per cent of those polled said they would be “delighted” if the UK voted to leave the EU.

But it dropped to 38 per cent after the shooting and Remain got a nine-point boost from those saying they would be “delighted” if we stayed.

However, of the 2,046 people questioned, all but 192 had been asked their opinions prior to the news emerging.

A YouGov survey last night had Britain slowly backing away from quitting the EU.

Support for staying is up five points to 44 per cent.

The Brexit campaign fell three points to 43 per cent. But with just four days to polls opening, one in ten is undecided.

YouGov pollster Anthony Wells said fears about the economy were behind the shift.

The Survation survey had voters rating David Cameron’s campaign highest on 17 per cent.

He was the only Remain candidate in the top four, with former London Mayor Boris Johnson second on 15 per cent, Ukip leader Nigel Farage third on ten per cent and Michael Gove fourth on nine per cent.

But 47 per cent said they weren’t sure whose campaign was best.

YouGov’s online survey on Wednesday and Thursday, with a 1,734 sample, found 62 per cent of respondents said immigration was important.

 

Seventy-one per cent did not trust Mr Cameron over the debate, compared with 66 per cent two months ago, while Nigel Farage’s trust rating rose to 24 per cent, up three per cent.

Tory MP and Leave campaigner Steve Baker said: “No one can take anything for granted.”

 

