Murder of MP Jo Cox is being treated as ‘terror related’, court hears as her ‘killer’ is remanded in custody

2016-6-20

THE murder of Labour MP Jo Cox is being treated as a terror-related crime, the Old Bailey heard today.

Tommy Mair, 52, appeared in court via videolink accused of shooting Mrs Cox, 41, dead as she made her way to meet with constituents.

He is said to have knifed the MP for Batley and Spen as she got out of her car at 12.45pm on Thursday before shooting her three times with a modified rifle.

Appearing via video link, Mair spoke only to confirm his name during the 10-minute hearing.

There was no application for bail and Mr Justice Sweeney adjourned the case for a preliminary hearing on Thursday morning at 10am.

The case will be heard on that day by Mr Justice Saunders as part of his list of terror-related cases.

The mum-of-two was the first sitting MP to be killed since Tory Ian Gow was blown up by the IRA in 1990.

Death to traitors, freedom for Britain

At an initial hearing at Westminster Magistrates’ Court on Saturday, Mair wore a grey prison issue tracksuit.

He gave his name as “Death to traitors, freedom for Britain”.

Judge Arbuthnot, deputy chief magistrate for England and Wales, replied: “Pardon, sorry?”

Mair then repeated the name. After a long pause, the clerk then asked for his date of birth and home address, but he said nothing.

It has emerged Mrs Cox was planning to warn of an increase in anti-Muslim attacks before her tragic death.

Witnesses to the savage killing said the attacker shouted, “Britain first, keep Britain independent, Britain always comes first, this is for Britain”.

Politicians from all parties have united in grief to pay tribute to Mrs Cox since her death.

Prime Minister David Cameron described her as a "rising star" who "had a big heart" and was a "caring and committed MP".

While Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn said his party had lost a "much-loved colleague, a real talent and a dedicated campaigner for social justice and peace".

Today MPs returned to the House of Commons to remember Mrs Cox after being recalled during recess for the EU referendum.

It's after all major political parties agreed not to contest the upcoming by-election to elect an MP to Mrs Cox's seat.

But an ex-BNP member has announced he plans to fight to replace the murdered MP.

23-year-old Jack Buckby, 23, said he will contest the Batley and Spen by-election - forcing shocked local Labour members to campaign in the area despite their grief.

Mair, a gardener, is also charged with causing grievous bodily harm to Bernard Carter-Kenny, 77, who was also allegedly attacked at the same time as Mrs Cox.

The full bravery of retired miner Bernard Carter-Kenny, 77, has been revealed for the first time.

He was stabbed in the abdomen as he tried to save mum-of-two Mrs Cox from her killer.

The attacker was carrying ammunition, a modified .22 rifle with sawn-off barrel and a knife close to the scene.

Just three days after Mrs Cox's death, her husband revealed he took their children camping to remember their mother who "loved sleeping under the stars".

The outpouring of love to our family has been humbling. Thank you. And for supporting her causes https://t.co/l16ZrFmhw3 #MoreInCommon

Grieving Brendan Cox has also set up a GoFundMe page in the wake of her death, which has raised more than £800,000 for three of her favourite charities: the Royal Voluntary Service, which helps to combat loneliness in her West Yorkshire constituency; the White Helmets, volunteer search and rescue workers in Syria; and Hope Not Hate, which seeks to challenge hate and extremism in local communities across the UK.

Mrs Cox's sister Kim Leadbeater paid tribute to her "perfect" sibling in an emotional statement on Saturday.

She said: “Over the last 48 hours, people have not been silent. They have been vocal and passionate and have spoken from the heart. Genuine emotion with no hidden agenda.

"Jo would have loved it. We have to continue this strength and solidarity for the days, months and years to come as part of Jo’s legacy.

"To focus on that which unites us and not which divides us.”

At court on Saturday, Mair did not enter a plea and his lawyer Keith Allen said there was no indication what plea would be given.

Today, grey-bearded Mair, wearing beige trousers and a white long-sleeved t-shirt, replied "yes I am" when asked to confirm his name.

He has a history of mental health problems, and Deputy Chief Magistrate Emma Arbuthnot ordered he be assessed by a psychiatrist as the investigation continues.

Mair is said to have taken up gardening as part of his treatment for his psychiatric problems.

Mair, of Birstall, West Yorkshire. is due back in court on June 23 for a preliminary hearing, and is currently being held in top security jail HMP Belmarsh in southeast London.

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368.




