Spain fights to claim Gibraltar following British vote to leave EU saying ‘the Spanish flag is closer than ever’

2016-6-24

SPAIN will seek co-sovereignity on Gibraltar following Britain's vote to leave the European Union, according to the country's foreign minister.

Jose Manuel Garcia-Margallo said that Brexit has completely changed the outlook on the future of the peninsula.

The shocking news came as an overwhelming 95.9 per cent of voters in Gibraltar voted to stay in the EU.

Over the whole of Britain 52 per cent of voters supported Brexit.

Gibraltar has been a British Overseas Territory since 1713.

The small peninsula is known to its 30,000 residents as “the Rock” and is a major point of contention in Anglo-Spanish relations.

He said: “It's a complete change of outlook that opens up new possibilities on Gibraltar not seen for a very long time. I hope the formula of co-sovereignity - to be clear, the Spanish flag on the Rock - is much closer than before."

But Gibraltar's chief minister Fabian Picardo tweeted earlier: "We have surpassed greater challenges. It is time for unity, for calm and for rational thinking. Together and united we will continue to prosper."

He is due to give a speech on Friday afternoon.

Julie Girling, the South West England and Gibraltar Conservative MEP said:

A spokesman for Gibraltar's government declined to comment on the Brexit vote and referred to previous statements made on how co-sovereignty had already been rejected by around 99 percent of Gibraltarians in a previous local referendum.

Just 823 voters in the peninsula voted to leave the EU in an overwhelming victory for the Remain side.

The small territory was one of the first constituencies to reveal their results.

But when returning officer Paul Martinez got up to the podium to announce his results, an audience member’s mobile phone rang.

The official looked less than impressed at the rude interruption.

Turnout on the peninsula was incredibly high, with 85 per cent of registered voters turning out to make their decision.

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

