Murdered MP Jo Cox pictured one day before her death giving a talk to school kids in her constituency

2016-6-17

JO Cox inspires the next generation as she gives a talk to pupils — barely a day before she was gunned down in the street.

Labour MP Jo addressed a class of school kids on the EU referendum at Whitcliffe Mount School in Cleckheaton, West Yorks, on Wednesday.

The image, posted to her Twitter account, would be one of the final images of a tragic young mum devoted to public service.

In a caption under the photo, she wrote: "The #EUref debate @WMount in Cleckheaton was excellent. Lots of interest and great questions from students #Remain."

A day later she would lay dead after a horrific attack at the hands of a barbaric gun and knife attack following an advice surgery in her constituency of Batley and Spen.

Murder suspect Tommy Mair is in police custody today after the attack during which the MP was shot in head three times before being stabbed at least seven times with a foot-long knife.

The father of her assistant Fazila Aswat - who with with Jo as she lay dying in the street - spoke about her final words on Friday.

Gulham Maniyar told ITV News: "She was with my daughter. They'd left Batley office, they were in the marketplace, she was in my daughter's car sitting in the back seat. The car stopped and Jo decided to come out. 

"My daughter didn't know she'd been shot. Because this person must be waiting outside where the surgery happens.

"She said her [Jo's] injury was so bad and she was in her arms. There was lots of blood. She said 'Jo, get up' but she [Jo] said 'no, my pain is too much, Fazila'.

"I think those were the last words Jo spoke. She could not do anything else. She tried to comfort her. "Then the police came, the air ambulance came, they took her to hospital. She was a witness and her clothes were full of blood."

Details also emerged about how 52-year-old loner Mair - a  longstanding supporter of a neo-Nazi group - had bought a manual that gave instructions on how to build a gun.

PM David Cameron, Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn and Commons Speaker John Bercow laid flowers at a memorial to the murdered MP in Birstall, near Leeds, on Friday.

While Downing Street confirmed the Conservatives would not contest the by-election that will be triggered by her death.

The final days of Jo's life - posted to her Twitter page - detail her commitment to the community in her Yorkshire seat.

On Tuesday the mother of two children, aged three and five, spoke with local kids at the Batley Parish School, where she talked to youngsters about their aspirations.

The snap catches Jo standing in front of the engrossed children while she poses questions to them during school assembly.

She wrote alongside the picture: "Led the assembly at the wonderful Batley Parish School, we focused on good citizenship, democracy and aspiration."

Only one day earlier she met with MacMillan Cancer Support staff, working in the local community to help those affected by the disease.

Later that day she visited staff at a chippy that is now offering gluten-free fish and chips to customers.

And last week the 41-year-old highlighted the work done by local church-goers in the community.

Tributes to Jo continued to pour in on Friday as neighbours of the couple's London boat said her husband Brendan was "in bits".

Anne Wainwright chair of the Heritage Moorings said: "I spoke to Jo's husband Brendan last night and we've exchanged some messages.

"He's obviously in bits, I can't imagine what he's going through. And her parents as well, it's so terrible, we're in such shock."

Brendan had last night spoken about how his family would never recover from the loss of Jo, as he posted a poignant last photo of his wife.

He wrote: "Today is the beginning of a new chapter in our lives. More difficult, more painful, less joyful, less full of love.

"I and Jo’s friends and family are going to work every moment of our lives to love and nurture our kids and to fight against the hate that killed Jo.

"Jo believed in a better world and she fought for it everyday of her life with an energy, and a zest for life that would exhaust most people.

"She would have wanted two things above all else to happen now, one that our precious children are bathed in love and two, that we all unite to fight against the hatred that killed her.”

Her parents Gordon and Jean Leadbeater spoke of their shock from the family's home in Roberttown, West Yorks, on Friday.

Gordon said: "It's too early yet, we're still in shock so not yet."

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

 

