Conservative think-tank puts pressure on David Cameron to call ‘attachment’ to notion of free movement into question

2016-6-18

A TORY think tank backed by senior Ministers heaped pressure on David Cameron last night by joining calls to review “antiquated” EU immigration rules.

Bright Blue said Brussels lawmakers had to “face reality” and revise free movement legislation which allows all EU nationals to come to the UK to live and work as they please.

And it said the EU’s “stubborn attachment” to the principle was shattering public support.

The think tank is a “modernising” group which counts Education Secretary Nicky Morgan and former Trade Minister Francis Maude on its advisory board.

Bright Blue director Ryan Shorthouse said: “My personal view is that we should remain in the EU.

“But a considerable proportion of the population will have voted to leave in the EU referendum, largely because of the inability to control the number of people migrating to our country.

“The EU must face reality and learn the lessons of this flirtation with Brexit: the free movement of people is unsustainable in a growing bloc which contains countries with such diverse living standards.”

He added: “There needs to be a meaningful review and revision of this antiquated principle to lessen the huge flow of people across Europe, a phenomenon which is unfair to both richer and poorer member states.”

The intervention comes just three days after Theresa May revealed the first cracks in the Government’s stance on immigration policy.

The Home Secretary said “we should look at further reform in the future” just hours after Chancellor George Osborne dismissed the suggestion out of hand.

The split came 24 hours after Labour Deputy Leader Tom Watson plunged his party into chaos by making a shock call for curbs to Brussels’ free movement laws – which give all EU nationals to live and work in Britain.

Downing Street was forced on Tuesday night dismiss claims it may offer controls on free movement in a last-ditch bid to win over voters in next week’s Referendum.

Official figures in May showed net migration hit a whopping 333,000 last year – with net migration from EU countries at 184,000.

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368.

 

