It’s no coincidence that it’s the Old Etonians telling you we have to Remain…tell them to stuff it

2016-6-23

AT last – it’s Independence Day!

Your chance to tick a box and help ensure that Britain is run by the ­people best placed to run it.

The British.

Your chance to get the hell out of a dysfunctional club full of squabbling politicians and furious citizens, from Athens all the way to Hamburg.

A chance to stick it to the rich and powerful who have been begging you these past few weeks to vote Remain.

And after today, no matter which way you vote, at last there will be an end to the ludicrous debates.

The campaigners flinging porky pies at you every time they open their mouth.

The berserk, partisan audiences on those Question Time ­programmes who sound like they’re at an FA Cup semi-final or watching The X Factor.

No more of that crap — until the next referendum, at least.

So now all you have to do is vote.

And, of course, that is down to you.

If you decide to vote Remain I respect that decision in a very real sense.

In a very, very, real sense.

But, mate — don’t do it.

Really don’t do it.

And if for some reason you’re even wavering, here are 20 ­reasons why you should vote LEAVE  . . .

1. The European Union isn’t working.

The southern ­European countries are bankrupt.

The north has to bail them out.

Greece will be back with its cap in its hand very soon. ­

Unemployment in these countries is sky-high, especially among the young.

There are riots, demos and tear gas in the major cities.

Meanwhile, in the well-off north, the people are furious about the tide of migrants ­arriving every day — a truly insane policy which we should keep well away from.

2. This is a battle between the rich and the poor, between the haves and have-nots, between the powerful and powerless.

It’s no coincidence that it’s the bankers and big business and international institutions and the Old Etonians telling you we have to “remain”.

Tell them to stuff it.

3. Why should idiots in Brussels and Strasbourg tell us how to run our country when we have plenty of idiots over here who can do the same thing, and more cheaply?

4. Migration from within the European Union has meant reduced incomes for the least well-off British people.

And we simply don’t have the infra- structure to cope with the ­numbers coming in.

5. The luvvies want you to vote Remain.

That should be a clincher all by itself.

As soon as Daniel Craig, Emma Thompson and Bob Geldof start insisting you do something, always do the opposite.

They are never right.

And of course, like the rest of the Remain ­supporters, they’re loaded.

6. Oh, and the maniacal extremist Muslim jihadi halfwit Anjem Choudary is voting Remain.

He likes the fact we can’t deport nutjobs like himself because of EU or European Court rulings.

Don’t make Anjem happy today.

7. If we stay, the EU will get worse and worse.

It will keep giving itself more powers. ­

Whatever the Remain monkeys tell you, the plan is for a European superstate.

The European politicians are very clear about that.

Our pro-Remain campaigners are lying when they say that’s not on the cards.

8. The nation state has served us well.

OK, it’s been a bit of a problem on mainland Europe from time to time.

But that’s their problem, not ours.

The UK didn’t invade Poland, did it?

9. Quite soon Turkey will be a member of the European Union. Yay!

David Cameron insists that it’s not on the cards — but he’s lying.

He has already promised the Turks he’ll help “pave the road from Ankara to Brussels.”

Just what we want, huh?

10. We give the European Union much, much more money than we get back.

This goes straight into the pockets of Greeks who don’t pay their taxes and French farmers who are spectacularly useless at, er, farming.

Why should we subsidise incompetence?

Isn’t there enough poverty in the UK?

11. Oh, and a billion quid every year goes to Brussels for “international aid”.

That money mainly ends up in the trouser pockets of Third World tyrants.

12. At the same time, though, the EU makes it much harder for Third World countries to sell their goods here.

In every way, it discriminates against the poorest of us.

13. Paula Radcliffe is voting Remain.

But hopefully she’ll be caught short on the way to the polling booth.

14. The European Union and the European Commission are incredibly undemocratic.

The president of the commission, some fat-faced oaf from ­Luxembourg, has threatened countries which vote for right-wing populist parties with ­sanctions.

That is a shocking development.

But they also penalise countries which vote for left-wing populist parties.

You do exactly as ve say or it vill be ze worse for you, Tommy.

Nope, not having it.

15. David Beckham is voting Remain, and he’s as thick as a block of cheddar cheese.

Dunno what his missus is doing.

Sulking, most likely.

16. The sheer scale of the lies you’ve been told by the Remain camp should suggest that they don’t have a leg to stand on.

The Prime Minister has warned that there will be wars.

And we’ll all be broke.

And our houses worthless.

Yet a few months back he said he had an open mind on the issue.

And don’t worry — we will still be able to travel to Spain for our holidays.

And eat pesto.

If we want to.

Never has so much ­bulls**t been sprayed over so many people.

17. No more European red tape telling us we can’t deport some Somalian serial rapist because he has a right to a family life in the UK.

18. The European Union is ­planning to build itself an army.

Great.

I’m kinda happy with our Nato alliance, frankly.

European army would be incompetent and divided.

19. The EU is a vast bureaucracy, costing much more than it should.

It is a gravy train for third-rate politicians and civil servants.

20. Remember how funny it was last May, watching the leftie liberals sobbing into their low-fat almond milk lattes when the Tories won the election?

Their shrieks and howls of outrage?

Make them howl again.

Wipe those smug smiles off their silly faces.

And reclaim our country. BeLeave.

