MPs place roses in Jo Cox’s empty Commons seat as parents grieve at Parliament memorial

2016-6-20

MPs placed a red and white rose in Jo Cox's empty seat in the House of Commons today as Jeremy Corbyn led tributes to the murdered MP.

The Labour leader said her slaughter last week was an "attack on our whole democracy" in what appeared to be "an act of extreme political violence" in tearful scenes in Parliament today.

In a gesture of cross-party solidarity, Prime Minister David gave way to the Labour leader to speak first as Parliament was recalled to honour the fallen MP who would have turned 42 on Wednesday.

With Mrs Cox's parents, children and husband looking on, Mr Corbyn told a silent House of Commons: "We have lost one of our own and our society has lost one of our very best.

"She spent her life serving and campaigning for other people - whether as a worker for Oxfam or for the anti-slavery charity the Freedom Fund, as a political activist and as a feminist.

"The horrific act that took her from us was an attack on democracy, and our whole country has been shocked and saddened by it.

He added : "In her tragic death we can come together to change our politics. To tolerate a little more and condemn a little less."

The PM said Mrs Cox had been a "loving determined passionate and progressive politician who epitomised the best of humanity".

He said: "We are here today to remember an extraordinary colleague and friend. Jo Cox was a voice of compassion whose irrepressible spirit and boundless energy lit up the lives of all who knew her, and saved the lives of many she never, ever met.

"Today we grieve her loss, and we hold in our hearts and prayers her husband Brendan, her parents and sister, and her two children who are just three and five years-old.

"We express our anger at the sickening and despicable attack that killed her as she did her job serving her constituents on the streets of Birstall."

Commons Speaker John Bercow had agreed to recall MPs to allow members to commemorate a colleague described as "perfect" by her family. The Lords also returned today.

The Speaker said MPs were meeting in "heartbreaking sadness" and "heartfelt solidarity" and condemned her killing as an attack on "our freedom".

Male MPs from all sides wore the white rose of Yorkshire as a button hole and women donned colourful scarves in Mrs Cox's honour.

Her husband Brendan, two young children and Mrs Cox's parents watched proceedings from the public gallery.

Mrs Cox's three-year-old daughter Lejla played with a drawing board on her dad's knee throughout the service while Cuillin, five, cuddled his grandmother.

MPs recalled a "bundle of energy and brains" often seen striding through Westminster in cycling gear, rushing home to put her three and five-year-old children to bed.

Former Labour frontbencher Rachel Reeves broke down in tears as she paid tribute to her friend of 10 years.

"Batley and Spen will elect another MP, but no-one can replace a mother," she said as she was comforted by colleagues.

Family friend Stephen Kinnock, who shared an office with Mrs Cox, said his former colleague would have reacted with "outrage" at the divisive Leave.EU poster released last week.

Mr Kinnock said the nation must follow the words of Mrs Cox's husband Brendan and "fight against the hatred that killed Jo".

He added: "In the name of Jo Cox and all that is decent we must not let this atrocity intimidate our democracy.

"We must now work to build a more respectful and united country because this is our time to honour the legacy of the proud Yorkshire lass who dedicated her life to the common good and who was so cruelly taken away from us in the prime of her life.

"Jo Cox: We love you, we salute you and we shall never forget you."

Mr Cox tweeted after the hour-long session:

Thank you to the whole House& staff for your kindness& compassion to our family today & for describing so well the Jo we love #MoreInCommon

After almost an hour of tributes from MPs on all sides of the political divide, members broke parliamentary convention and gave Mrs Cox a standing ovation before making their way to St Margaret’s Church opposite parliament for a memorial service.

After the service MPs and Mrs Cox's parents flocked to a memorial in Parliament Square where mourners have piled flowers in recent days.

Gordon and Jean Leadbeater held each other close as they read some of the cards left in the amongst the floral tributes on the grass outside Parliament.

The killing of the 41-year-old MP outside the public library in Birstall in her West Yorkshire constituency has prompted an outpouring of public grief.

MPs have praised her passionate commitment to causes such as the plight of Syrian refugees and her ability to work with colleagues on all sides of the House.

Local people have paid tribute to her infectious enthusiasm and tireless efforts on behalf of her constituents.

A memorial fund to raise money for charities she supported has reached almost £900,000.

Prayers were said on Sunday for Mr Cox's husband Brendan and their children at a service at St Peter's Church, less than half a mile from where she died.

The Rev Paul Knight told the congregation: "Her humanity was powerful and compelling and we would do well to recognise her as an amazing example - a 21st century Good Samaritan."

Mr Knight said: "Jo was someone who went out of her way to help others. I regret to say I didn't know what she was like as a girl but she grew into a fervent advocate for the poor and oppressed.

"And though she must have been angry at times about what she saw here and around the world - those places she visited and worked - she seemed to me, at least, to be one who could fight with a passion and a disarming smile."

The MP and former aid worker will also be honoured with an album of live music from Glastonbury festival, with the likes of Coldplay and Muse agreeing to contribute songs from their upcoming sets to the album.

Oxfam Presents: Stand As One - Live at Glastonbury 2016 is a first-of-its-kind live album in support of the charity’s work with refugees worldwide.

Mark Goldring, Oxfam GB chief executive, said it would now be made in memory of the Labour MP, who was a former Oxfam activist and who was killed on June 16.

He said: "Given Jo's tireless work to help refugees both at Oxfam and beyond, it felt appropriate to dedicate the album to her."

Glastonbury co-organiser Emily Eavis explained: "We are making this special live album from Glastonbury this summer because the scale of the refugee crisis is so huge we simply had to do something.

"We want people who are far from home and frightened to know we are doing whatever we can to help.

"To know the artists who play here are doing whatever they can. To know the people who love their music are doing whatever they can.

"Now it's time for world leaders to do the same. All of us - Glastonbury, Oxfam, musicians and music-lovers everywhere - must Stand As One to demand action for refugees."

Sigur Ros, The Last Shadow Puppets, Chvrches, Wolf Alice, Laura Mvula, Jamie Lawson, The 1975, Editors, Years & Years and Fatboy Slim are also confirmed for the album - with more expected to join.

