The UK should believe in itself and vote Leave in tomorrow’s EU referendum says Boris as he kisses fish in final Brexit push

2016-6-22

BORIS Johnson says tomorrow’s EU referendum is “our chance to believe in ourselves” as he embarks on a final push for Brexit today.

The Leave campaigner was up early kissing fish in Billingsgate Market with Joey Essex's uncle Greg, who works as a porter there, as he argues the UK can "take back control" of its taxes, democracy, immigration if we vote to quit Brussels.

He said: “We should believe in our country, believe in what we can do. Take back control and vote leave.

"It would be independence day for this country. So I hope people do it.”

The top Tory also took a swipe at the rival Remain campaign, saying it has been offering "nothing but fear".

Mr Johnson moved on to Essex this morning on his seven-stop tour of the country, and speaking to the BBC said only a few months ago, before "Project Fear kicked in", David Cameron had said the UK could flourish outside the EU.

Arguing in favour of a vote to leave, the former London Mayor said: "We can begin the process of extracting ourselves from this burdensome and anti-democratic system of governance."

After being questioned on what would happen to trade he said the UK would continue to have access to the single market - but do "even better" by not being a member.

Speaking on the Breakfast programme he said it was about “taking back control of huge amounts of money” the UK sends to the European Union.

“It's about our chance as a nation once again to stand on our own two feet,” he adds.

“And to speak up on behalf of democracy for literally hundreds of millions of people who agree with us."

Mr Johnson is travelling by private plane and then helicopter as the referendum battle takes to the skies, with a Remain campaign using their own aircraft to try and convince voters ahead of polling day.

Labour In for Britain is dispatching two propeller jets, one over London and one over other major British cities, with banners reading: “Labour says vote Remain.”

David Cameron has also been speaking to the media this morning, telling the Today programme “Britain can't jump out of the aeroplane and then clamber back into the cockpit”.

He failed to say whether he will quit as Prime Minister if Britain votes to leave.

Speaking on BBC Radio 4 he said: "I will accept the instructions of the British people and get to work on Friday morning to deliver them."

Speaking to Radio 4's Today programme, he urged voters to vote remain, saying: "You can't jump out of the aeroplane and then clamber back into the cockpit."

And he also claimed Britain will be a more "insular and inward-looking country" if it backs Brexit, and hit out at the Leave campaign's "narrow" focus on immigration.

