EU laws mean Theresa May has to beg the courts to kick an Italian killer out of Britain

2016-6-21

THERESA May was today forced to beg the courts to boot out a brutal Italian killer allowed to stay in the UK by “mad” EU laws.

In a desperate last ditch bid, the Home Secretary urged judges to overturn an order from 2012 blocking the deportation of a convicted criminal known only as ‘FV’.

The Italian national was convicted of the manslaughter of his flatmate Edward Mitchell in 2002 after striking him around the head 20 times with weapons including a hammer.

He also strangled him with the flex from an iron.

The charge was reduced to manslaughter for reasons of provocation.

But after being released from prison the Home Office was told four years ago that he could not be deported as it was “unlawful” under EU free movement law – giving him a right to citizenship and permanent residence having built up a life in Britain.

This is despite him breaching a suspended sentence for “battery” just months before.

Brexit-backing Justice Minister Dominic Raab said the case highlighted the “skewed moral compass” at the heart of EU free movement rules.

He blasted: “An EU national convicted of brutally killing someone in this country, by hammering and strangling them to death, can’t be removed on the basis of the conviction by a UK court.

“It’s dangerous and undemocratic.”

He added that David Cameron in opposition had slammed the legal position as “complete madness”. And he said: “The Prime Minister is absolutely right.

“The only way to restore some sanity is to vote leave and take back control of our borders.”

A judgement from the Supreme Court is not expected until long after Thursday’s Referendum.

But it comes just two weeks after the Brexit campaign published a dossier of 50 killers Britain has been prevented from deporting because of EU free movement laws giving EU nationals the right to stay in the UK.

One was convicted murderer Learco Chindamo was murdered headteacher Philip Lawrence in 1995 when he went to help a 13 year-old boy who was being attacked.

In 2007 Justice Collins said removing Chindamo would be “disproportionate” under EU law. At the time, then opposition leader David Cameron said: “This does seem to be complete madness.”

Government sources yesterday claimed the Home Office is challenging the 2012 verdict to argue that a prison sentence should be treated as a period out of the UK – thereby breaking his right to residence.

The Italian – ‘FV’ – was sentenced to 8 years in prison in 2002. He had previous convictions for assault on police, drunk driving and driving while disqualified.

He was released to hostel accommodation in 2006, but as no place was available, he received £25,000-worth of damages for the unlawful imprisonment which followed.

