PM claims Brexit will slap extra £200 on motorists’ fuel bills

2016-6-20

BREXIT could slap an extra £200 a year on drivers’ fuel pump bills, David Cameron last night claimed.

The PM told The Sun that leaving the EU will spark a sharp drop in the value of the Pound by as much as 20 per cent.

That will ramp the cost to garage owners of importing petrol and diesel, which they will pass on to consumers, and Sun readers will suffer the most.

Mr Cameron claimed: “It could put £200 on a typical fuel bill for the year for someone driving a Ford Focus.

“If the pound goes down, the cost of petrol goes up.”

In a bid to flag up the risks of Brexit to ordinary people’s pockets, the PM added: “My worry is that the people who will be hit the hardest by leaving the EU are hardworking Sun readers, who want to support their families.

“That is just one aspect of where people who not necessarily on high wages are the most at risk of an exit where we see the economy shrink, opportunities go down and we lose jobs.”

Last month, Leave campaign boss Boris Johnson insisted Brexit would have the opposite effect on fuel prices by liberating.

Breaking free from Brussels would the end EU’s “stranglehold” on our pumps by letting the British government slash VAT on fuel below the current 15 per cent floor set by Brussels.

But the PM hit back at the ex-Tory London Mayor’s promise to brand it “fantasy” economics”.

Mr Cameron said: “They have spent this money, which does not exist by the way, ten times over.

“If we leave the EU there is no saving. There is a cost.”

Even the Leave campaign’s own economist Andrew Lilico has admitted the cost to the British economy of leaving the EU in the short term will be £60bn, or a 2% hit to GDP, Mr Cameron also insisted.

He added: “And there is also no way back.

“If you take that risk in a general election, you can change your mind in five years’ time and you can chuck the team you have elected out.

“If we take this risk, this is a one way ticket.

“Once you have jumped off the diving board you cannot scramble back up onto it.”

