David Cameron hits back at former top aide Steve Hilton in row over immigration

2016-6-21

A MAJOR public row over immigration has exploded between the PM and his Brexit backing former “guru” Steve Hilton.

The former No 10 aide claimed that David Cameron was told by civil servants “directly and explicitly, that it was impossible for the Government to meet its immigration target as long as we remained members of the EU.”

But the PM hit back on TV, saying: “It’s simply not right.”

The furious Premier lashed out: “Actually when Steve Hilton left Downing Street in 2012, net immigration had actually fallen quite substantially and it got down to 154,000, so not far away from the ambition that I set.”

The latest row is the most vicious between the pair, who have been close political allies since the 1990s but are now trading bitter Brexit blows.

 

Just weeks ago Mr Cameron insisted he stuck by his “ambition” of bringing net migration into the UK — which last month hit 333,000 — below 100,000.

Downing Street said they “did not recognise” Mr Hilton’s account of the meeting.

But Vote Leave backing Steve Hilton said the PM made the pledge at the 2015 general election even though he “had been told was undeliverable”.

Mr Hilton added: “You don’t need to sit in a ‘stock take’ meeting at No 10 Downing Street to see the obvious truth: our immigration system is completely broken, and as long as we’re in the EU, our elected governments are powerless to fix it.

“In the 2015 Conservative manifesto, the Prime Minister reaffirmed his commitment to the immigration target he had been told was undeliverable.

“When I saw that, I assumed this was either because he was certain he could negotiate a solution within the EU, or was assuming we would leave,” he added.

“For the Government to continue to make the promise today, after no negotiated solution was achieved and while campaigning to stay, is, I think, what Michael Gove and Boris Johnson meant when they described this as corrosive of trust in politics.”

Asked on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme if he and his party had campaigned on a “lie” at the last election, Michael Gove said: “No I did not. I believed and hoped that we would be able to secure a deal with Europe which would enable us to amend free movement.”

Tonight Brexit backing Tory MPs called on the PM to scrap the controversial pledge.

Speaking on the Vote Leave battle bus  former Defence Secretary Liam Fox said: “It is not possible to control migration from within the EU.”

He added: “If we vote to Remain on Thursday, the Conservatives must drop the pledge we made at the election as it would be dishonest to maintain the pretence that the issue was within our control.”

The row came as respected think tank Migration Watch claimed that “overseas students from outside the EU who stay on indefinitely in the UK” are hugely inflating net migration figures.

They said that there was “no evidence of departure” for over 100,000 a year.

The group’s chairman Lord Green of Deddington said: “In all the talk about the government failing to reduce non-EU migration, the question of the vanishing students has been overlooked.

“The government have postponed, until after the referendum, the publication of the first information about the exit checks which came into effect in April 2015.”

He added: “They must be used to identify the culprit colleges and achieve the enforcement that is long overdue.”

