David Cameron urged to make Michael Gove deputy PM to stop him quitting the Cabinet if Britain votes to stay in the EU

2016-6-21

LEAVE campaign boss Michael Gove has revealed he may quit the Cabinet if Britain votes to stay in the EU.

The Justice Secretary let his thinking slip when quizzed on whether the criticism  he has aired on so many government positions on the UK’s membership made his position untenable.

Mr Gove told Radio 4’s Today Programme: “I want people to concentrate not on my job but on their jobs.

“Of course, depending on what the result is on Friday, I will reflect and I will decide what is the best course for me.”

The declaration heaps pressure on PM David Cameron to act immediately to start healing the massive euro-schism down the middle of the Conservative Party.

No10 aides are urging him to make Mr Gove Deputy PM on Friday to also offer an immediate olive branch to millions of Leave voters, The Sun has learned.

But Mr Cameron is expected to delay the rest of his big Cabinet reshuffle until September in a bid to keep Tory MPs in line during the referendum’s high tension aftermath.

If he wins the landmark vote, the PM will also issue a new pledge to fight for new far-reaching reforms to the EU to represent Brexit-backers’ views.

Mr Cameron previewed his offer in an interview with The Sun in today’s paper, in which he promised to “drive forward the changes that are needed”.

In a later interview on LBC radio tonight, Mr Gove tried to row back on his resignation thoughts.

Labelling his ministerial future “up to the Prime Minister”, the Justice Secretary said: “If he wants me, I’m absolutely delighted and if he’s had enough that his prerogative”.

But leaving the door open to a Cabinet walk out, Mr Gove added: “Nothing is 100% certain”.

Separately, Michael Gove compared economists cited by the Government to rubbish a Brexit to those used by the Nazis to smear Albert Einstein in the 1930s.

He told LBC: “I think the key thing here is to interrogate the assumptions that are made and to ask if these arguments are good.

“We have to be careful about historical comparisons, but Albert Einstein during the 1930s was denounced by the German authorities for being wrong and his theories were denounced and one of the reasons of course he was denounced was because he was Jewish.

“They got 100 German scientists in pay of the Government to say that he was wrong and Einstein said ‘Look, if I was wrong, one would have been enough’.”

