Budget airline left red-faced after launching 24 hour £9.99 sale to ‘celebrate remaining in Europe’

2016-6-23

RED-FACED Ryanair bosses who rushed to celebrate Britain staying in the EU say they will still offer cheap flights to passengers - despite a Brexit win.

Before the final result was announced, the budget airline sent out an email that read: "Celebrate remaining in Europe with one million seats from £9.99".

But the 24-hour sale soon became a laughing stock when Leave stormed ahead - despite all the polls predicting a Brexit loss.

The final result saw 17,759,184 Brits vote to leave, while 16,580,508 backed remain.

The embarrassing error amused many on social media who poked fun at Ryanair for getting it so wrong.

Just got this from @Ryanair think they may be a bit confused over the result.... pic.twitter.com/QZogOXzpoj

Always great to have #emailmarketing campaigns ready to go but never forget the human check #EURefResults @Ryanair https://t.co/xjy0yprIR6

Someone at @ryanair is going to feel pretty foolish about this morning's email pic.twitter.com/b5fpkpy0rd

Despite panic in the #Remain camp, @Ryanair laughs in the face of #Brexit with cocky email pic.twitter.com/nHThzTJABA

Ryanair’s Robin Kiely today told The Sun the airline would honour its word, with the offer ending at midnight tonight.

He said: "Yes, and it’s a good job we’re better at running an airline than political campaigns.

"Britons are booking our £9.99 seats in record numbers in what will be the last big seat sale of its kind, as they look to flee a country which will be run by Boris, Gove and Farage.”

The low fares will be available until midnight on Friday at Ryanair.com.

LIVE UPDATES: For all the latest on the referendum results

"To celebrate what we pray will be a big Remain majority, we're launching a 1 million seat sales with fares to Europe starting from just £9.99 - less than the UK's £13 travel tax - for travel in October and November, just after midnight tonight until midnight Friday.

In the email celebrating victory for Remain, Ryanair's chief executive Michael O' Leary said: "As the UK's largest airline, Ryanair hopes the UK will vote to Remain in the EU.

"Just like the EU Referendum, these fares are once in a lifetime and will be snapped up quickly, so customers should log onto www.ryanair.com before they sell out.

"And if the Leave side do win, then these will be the last low fares the UK will enjoy for a very long time."

Ryanair have offered similar flash sales in the past.

Last July, travellers got a million seats for £14.19 to celebrate its 30th birthday.

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? 

Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

 

