Widower of MP Jo Cox tweets his reaction to Brexit

2016-6-24

THE husband of Jo Cox has said his wife “would have remained optimistic and focussed” in the wake of Britain’s decision to leave the European Union.

Brendan, 37, tweeted this morning as the result came in: “Today Jo wld have remained optimistic and focussed on what she cld do to bring our country back together around our best values.”

Today Jo wld have remained optimistic & focussed on what she cld do to bring our country back together around our best values #MoreInCommon

He ended his tweet with #moreincommon – a phrase which has been used by Mr Cox in the wake of his wife’s death.

At just after 6am this morning Leave passed the threshold of 16.8million votes needed to trigger a Brexit.

The ultra-narrow margin of victory of 52% to 48% left the nation split down the middle.

Labour MP Jo had been campaigning to remain as part of the EU before she was stabbed to death in Birstall, West Yorkshire last week.

Brendan’s tweet has been retweeted 2,000 times and liked more than 2,200.

A day before her death Jo, Brendan and their two young children had taken part in the flotilla on the Thames.

She said her family had taken part because “we’re stronger in”.

My hubby @MrBrendanCox & children taking part in the battle of the #Thames - because we're #StrongerIn #Remain pic.twitter.com/6JNMnQ4Zfg

Charity director Brendan has previously said his wife was murdered because of her “very strong political views”.

He said: “She was a politician and she had very strong political views and I believe she was killed because of those views.

“I think she died because of them, and she would want to stand up for those in death as much as she did in life.”

The MP’s death resulted in both the ‘Remain’ and ‘Leave’ sides suspending their campaigns.

Widower Brendan, who was an adviser to former Prime Minister Gordon Brown, says Jo was concerned about the vicious rhetoric coming from both sides of the political divide.

He said: “I think she was very worried that the language was coarsening, that people were being driven to take more extreme positions, that people didn’t work with each other as individuals and on issues, it was all much too tribal."

Jo became Labour MP for Batley and Spen at last year’s General Election.

Brendan added: “She was particularly worried about the direction of politics at the moment, particularly around creating division and playing on people’s worst fears rather than their best instincts.”

Events took place all over the world to mark what would have been Jo Cox's 42nd birthday this week.

Thomas Mair, 52, who has been charged with her murder, refused to give his name in court saying instead: “Death to traitors, freedom for Britain”.

 

