10 reasons why you must vote Brexit in Thursday’s crucial once in a lifetime referendum

2016-6-17

TEN reasons why I want you to vote Brexit on Thursday.

Look what 40 years of Europe has done to me.

1) Those two posh boys in Downing Street will be out of a job and we won’t have to listen to their lies about the world ending if we Brexit.

With Cameron and Osborne gone we can look forward to a Prime Minister who understands what it’s like for ordinary people when their child can’t get into a school of their choice as it’s too crowded, or worse, seeing Mum lying on a trolley for hours at a packed A&E.

2) Scotland will demand another referendum to leave the United Kingdom so it can stay in the EU – and everybody south of the border will say: “Don’t bother voting, just go.”

We can then stop sending English taxpayers’ money to Jockistan, as they receive £1,600 a year more per head than we do.

It would be cheaper for we wealth creators to burn a £50 note every other week.

3) We can introduce a modified Australian points system for immigration, which will stop our population growing by at least 250,000 a year.

That’s a new city the size of Wolverhampton.

Even the people of Wolverhampton would agree that one Wolverhampton is quite enough.

4) Gordon Brown and Tony Blair, two of the worst prime ministers in living memory, can be wheeled back to the embalmers.

Their crazy open-door policy, which they deliberately kept quiet about, let five million migrants into the country in a decade, changing some towns and cities for ever.

They can take John Major with them. 

He almost single-handedly destroyed the Pound.

5) Brexit will signal the beginning of the end for the EU. Other countries will seek referendums and slowly it will revert to the original idea of a trade federation.

It will be bad news for Germany, who lost the war in 1945 but won the peace.

They will now not be able to send their one million migrants our way.

Mrs Merkel will be blamed till the end of time for her misjudgment.

6) We’ll be able to deport the 16,000 foreign criminals sitting in our jails, costing us £640million a year, without loopy European judges saying it’s a breach of their human rights to send them back to wherever they came from.

7) Labour voters will at last show they are not just cannon fodder for Corbyn and his Islington chums but want to be heard on the subject of immigration without having to face taunts of being racists or bigots.

Brexit’s win will be a triumph of the workers over their bosses.

8) When Greece goes bust (they pay less tax than Mrs Philip Green) it will quickly be followed by Italy and France heading to the bankruptcy courts, but our PM won’t be forced to bail them out.

Remember Cameron saying we didn’t have to put our hand in our pocket for Greece last time? 

What happened? 

We had to bung them £600million. 

Never again.

9) We will be able to buy cheaper food from Australia, New Zealand and Canada instead of paying inflated prices because of EU tariffs.

Food is estimated to cost 20 per cent higher than necessary.

No more having to subsidise inefficient French farmers, cheating Italian wine growers or Bulgarian goatherds.

We can trade with 167 countries in the world that aren’t in the EU if we have to.

10) Perhaps most importantly, we will have our democracy back. 

If we don’t like a policy we can change it.

 If we don’t like a politician we can fire them. 

Under Brussels that was impossible.

Under the EU, Britain has become a county council, not a sovereign nation. 

That moment will be over. 

For ever.

EXACTLY a month ago in this column I forecast that Cliff Richard would be cleared of the disgusting and baseless suggestion that he had sexually abused a number of men.

And so it has come to pass.

There was never a word of truth in it and I thank ace Sun reporter Katie Hodge for revealing that one of the “abused” victims was a psychopathic serial rapist.

How thick are the police in South Yorkshire?

They glibly say they simply follow the evidence.

From a psychotic rapist?

Get real.

I bet all the accusers were nutters.

History has not been kind to South Yorkshire.

First Orgreave, then Hillsborough, then Rotherham and finally Cliff Richard.

It’s time this police force was folded into either West or North Yorkshire.

They are a disgrace to their uniform.

CAKE shop in Downham Market, Norfolk – Cream Me Up Scotty.

Dog walker in Bishop Auckland, Co Durham – Taking The Lead.

Hairdresser’s in Ulceby, North Lincs – Hair Razors.

Pizzeria in Gloucester – History In The Baking.

Chippie in Javea, Costa Blanca – Incodneto.

The back of a butcher’s van in Tameside, Gtr Manchester – If this van is driven like a silly sausage please phone 0161 . . .

Roofing contractor in Harlow, Essex – Tiles Of The Unexpected.

Micro pub in Margate, Kent – Ales Of The Unexpected.

Cleaner in Freshwater, Isle of Wight – Done And Dusted.

A sign installation business in Adelaide, Australia – Stick ’Em Up.

Fireplace shop in Newport, Gwent – Grate Choice.

Butcher in Welling, Kent – Meat In Place.

Builder’s truck on the Costa Blanca – Brits And Mortar.

Record shop in Afflecks indoor market, Manchester – Vinyl Resting Place.

- These punnies are funnier than Corbyn. Keep sending them to kelvin@the-sun.co.uk

I KNOW you think me an old cynic but I simply don’t believe the Swiddleston romance.

I’m as sure as I can be it’s a PR stunt.

Fact: The fabulous Night Manager has just finished in the US.

Having the leading man romancing the hottest ­property in pop would send his profile even ­further through the roof.

Fact: Tom Hiddleston’s last movie, a Hank Williams biopic, was a low-grossing stinker and having just finished the King Kong blockbuster Kong: Skull Island his management would be anxious there was strong box office interest.

Fact: Hiddleston makes no secret of wanting the Bond job and it can’t be unhelpful to be snogging a good-looking woman nine years his junior.

So enter Taylor Swift ­anxious to give her ex, DJ ­Calvin Harris, a global V-sign by “dating” Hiddleston.
The only thing they have in common is cats.

He has one, she has two.

I have a feline they will soon go their ­separate ways.

Job done.

- THAT untalented communist dwarf Owen Jones stormed off the Sky News paper review because he didn’t like the debate surrounding the Orlando gay club slaughter.

I have two questions.

Why did Sky News apologise to him afterwards?

Neither the presenter nor the station did anything wrong.

By walking out, Jones made the terrible carnage all about him.

Typical.

My more important question is, why did Sky News hire this ego-laden prat for a Sunday slot in the first place?

 

- IN a desperate attempt to stop police spraying him with CS gas during hooligan violence in Lille, talkSPORT host Stan Collymore, shouted: “Journalist”.

I think he was being naive.

My experience tells me he would have been safer if he had shouted: “Not a journalist.”

- I NIP across London to watch Andy Murray and discover Dick Turpin had taken over the food court.

£8.50 for a ham baguette, £6.50 for a slice of cake, £4 for a scotch egg, not to mention half a bottle of champagne for £40.

I know why it’s called Queen’s . . . she’s the only one who could afford to eat there.
- THE thank-yous roll in.

With her 87-year-old mum paying £426 for her house and contents, Sheryl, from Wakefield, West Yorks, went on aspokesmansaid.com and switched hers to Admiral for £135, saving £291.

A nice thing to do for Mum.

Another reader, from a village outside Northampton, has saved £1,840 (a 40 per cent reduction) by switching to Octopus Energy through ASS.

You don’t think he grows cannabis, do you?

There’s good money to be saved out there.

Get switching today.

FRANKLY, Philip Green’s evidence to MPs was laughable.

He takes us for fools and he may be right.

Statement No.1: He claimed he didn’t know the details of the deal involving BHS flogging their Ealing store to his wife’s son, which he promptly resold for a £3million profit.

Unbelievable for a man who is all over everything – including my column.

Statement No.2: He claimed Mrs Green didn’t “share” her accounts with him and he “never looks at them”.

Really? The reason she is sitting on a £3billion fortune exclusively in her name is because Mr Green is a clever man who avoided all his tax obligations to this country by putting the assets in her name and then getting her to live in Monaco while he worked in London.

His was an appalling performance and the faster he fills the BHS pension hole and then joins his missus in Monaco for good, the better.

