Mourners pack local church to pay moving tribute to MP Jo Cox after gun attack

2016-6-17

MOURNERS packed a local church last night to pay tribute to MP Jo Cox who was murdered in her constituency.

Hundreds attended a service held at St Peter’s Parish Church in Birstall, West Yorkshire – only yards from where she was shot and stabbed.

It is believed that Cox was dragged to the floor by her hair and then gunned down at point-blank range by a man armed with an antique pistol.

She was shot three times as she left a constituency surgery at 12.50pm.

Witnesses told how the alleged killer, identified as Thomas Mair, 52,  calmly stood over her and reloaded each time before executing Jo with a final bullet to the head.

As the mum of two lay dying, he stabbed her at least seven times.

The incident shocked the country yesterday but has particularly hit home in the tight-knit community of Birstall – evidenced by the hundreds of people who turned out to mourn her.

A local resident who attended the vigil at the church told BBC News: “The church was packed.

“It was very, very moving.

“We’ve lost a very talented MP.

“I couldn’t not come today.

“Not a lot was said.

“People were asked to bow their heads and remember her.

“She’s a big loss to the community.

“She respected values.

“Whether you were Asian or white she was there for you.”

A Facebook post by the church read: “A prayer vigil is to be held at 8pm for Jo Cox MP and her family at St Peter’s Church, Birstall.

“Prayers for her and her family  - and all affected by her tragic death.

“May she rest in peace.”

Friends also gathered at Cox’s London-moored houseboat to lay flowers and light candles in her honour.

Describing Cox as a “beacon of hope who believed in love” fellow members of the boating community said today was “the saddest day of this closed community” as they had “lost a dear, dear friend, in the most tragic and outrageous circumstances”.

Dozens more joined Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn at an impromptu vigil for the married mother-of-two held in Westminster.

People gathered near Parliament to pay their respects to a Labour MP described by MP Stella Creasy as “one of a kind”.

Scores of flowers were laid in her memory, with Corbyn and Labour deputy Tom Watson providing tributes.

Before the vigil Corbyn said Cox was an "exemplary MP, a real servant of democracy in every way".

He added: "What's happened is beyond appalling.

“We're here tonight in silent memory of her loss and we express obviously condolences to her family.

Prime Minister David Cameron also paid tribute calling the death of Cox a "tragedy"and said: "We have lost a great star".

After calling a halt to EU referendum campaigning, he added: “She was a committed and caring MP.

“My thoughts are with Jo’s husband Brendan, their two children and wider family."

