Five million voters still don’t know which box to tick even as EU referendum looms

2016-6-22

A HUGE five million voters still don’t know which box to tick even as today’s EU referendum dawns, eve of polling day findings have revealed.

Four final voter surveys last night revealed the race between Remain and Leave is on a knife edge, with the two camps still level pegging.

The average of the four polls puts Remain on 51.25% and Leave on 48.75%.

That left experts having to admit the result of today’s landmark vote is far too close to call.

Opinium’s final poll put Leave ahead by a slither, by 51% to 49%, when the undecideds are stripped out.

YouGov's poll for The Times showed a swing in the other direction with Remain on 51%, and Leave on 49%.

Two others also picked up signs of a last minute swing back to Remain as some nervous voters opt back to the status quo.

ComRes gave the In campaign an eight point lead with Remain on 54% and Leave on 46%.

That is a three point boost for David Cameron’s camp from a poll that ComRes did for The Sun last week.

And SurveyMonkey’s final poll also gave Remain a small lead, of 51% versus 49%.

But the ComRes poll for ITV/Daily Mail also found more than one in 10 voters - 11% - are still undecided what to do today.

And an even bigger number, close to one in five – 17% - still last night said they may change their minds, meaning there is everything still to play for.

Most pollsters have predicted an 11th hour boost for Remain.

No10 have been left desperately relying on the status quo swing to keep Britain in the EU.

Britain’s most respected pollster, Strathclyde University’s Professor John Curtice, put support for each camps going into today at “50/50”.

Betfair punters put the chances of a Remain vote down a notch to 72% last night.

And bookies Ladbrokes gave a Remain vote the favourite odds of 2/7 and Leave a price of 11/4.

The bookies also dubbed the referendum “the biggest non-sporting event the bookmaking industry has ever seen”, with £100 million expected to have been wagered by the time polling stations close tonight.

