George Osborne says he ‘respects the decision of the British people’ as he tries to soothe the markets after post-Brexit turmoil

2016-6-24

GEORGE Osborne says he “respects the decision of the British people” as he tries to soothe the markets after post-Brexit turmoil this morning.

The Chancellor broke cover by tweeting that he had met with G7 finance ministers as he tries to keep his job in Government.

The Remain campaigner is under threat after his side lost the EU referendum but also after his great friend David Cameron announced he was resigning as Prime Minister.

Mr Osborne is hoping he will be able to stay on in his role at the Treasury, and posted a series of messages on social media this afternoon.

He said:  “Just briefed G7 finance ministers and bank governors on outcome of EU referendum.

“They all respect the decision of the British people.

“Discussed with G7 colleagues market consequences of UK's decision to leave EU.

“The Treasury and the Bank of England [are] monitoring [the]situation closely.”

The Chancellor added: “G7 central banks have taken steps to ensure adequate liquidity and to support functioning of markets.”

It was a hard fought campaign. It is not the outcome I wanted but I respect decision of British people and will do all I can to make it work

G7 central banks have taken steps to ensure adequate liquidity and to support functioning of markets

Discussed with G7 colleagues market consequences of UK's decision to leave EU. @hmtreasury and @bankofengland monitoring situation closely

Just briefed G7 finance ministers and bank governors on outcome of EU referendum. They all respect the decision of the British people

After addressing the markets, which have rallied today after plunging ion the announcement Brits had voted to quit Brussels, he moved on the referendum decision.

Mr Osborne was seen as the architect of the much-maligned “Project Fear” from the Remain camp, publishing a series of reports outlining the negative consequences of a Brexit.

But he was criticised for scaremongering, and using the weight of the civil service to try and swing the vote in his favour.

He tweeted today that it was “not the outcome he wanted”.

“It was a hard fought campaign,” the Chancellor wrote.

“It is not the outcome I wanted but I respect decision of British people and will do all I can to make it work.”

He may not get the opportunity, with many pro-Brexit Tories sharpening their knives to remove him from the position he has held since the 2010 general Election.

But there is no indication as yet he will go the way of his friend the PM, who made an emotional statement outside Downing Street this morning.

Mr Cameron indicted he would be resigning, with a new leader of the Conservative Party to be installed by the time of its conference in the autumn.

The Chancellor had hoped to take over, and make the move from Number  11 Downing Street to Number 10.

But that now seems unlikely, after the electorate voted to leave the EU by 52% to 48%.

The PM said: "I do not think it would be right for me to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination."

Flanked by wife Samantha, the PM said he had informed the Queen of his decision to remain in place for the short term.

"The British people have voted to leave the European Union and their will must be respected," said Mr Cameron.

"The will of the British people is an instruction that must be delivered."

His voice breaking, Mr Cameron said: "I love this country and I feel honoured to have served it and I will do everything I can in future to help this great country succeed."

