Tory councillor suspended for vile ‘steam off my p***’ comment about Jo Cox memorial fund

2016-6-21

A TORY councillor has been suspended after he posted a horrific comment about the memorial fund for murdered MP Jo Cox – saying he had “donated the steam off my p***”.

Dominic Peacock posted a message on a pro-Brexit Facebook page alongside a report about how £1million has now been raised in memory of the mother-of-two who was gunned down and stabbed last Thursday.

Cllr Peacock, a Leave supporter in the EU Referendum, then defended the post, saying he was "sick and tired" of Mrs Cox’s death being "used against the Brexit cause".

This afternoon East Riding Council leader Stephen Parnaby announced he has suspended Mr Peacock from the East Riding Conservative Group.

And Mr Parnaby said he was seeking to have the former Hull City Council worker expelled.

But within 25 minutes of Cllr Peacock making the comment he had deleted the post.

Hull Daily Mail reports, in a follow-up comment on the same page he said: "I've deleted my offensive comment I shouldn't have put it on in the first place – I won't make excuses."

East Riding Council leader and leader of the Conservative Group, Cllr Stephen Parnaby, said: "Following inappropriate and offensive comments made on social media relating to the sad and tragic death of Jo Cox MP, I have suspended Cllr Dominic Peacock from the East Riding of Yorkshire Council Conservative Group with immediate effect.

“I shall be reporting this to a meeting of the full Group and my recommendation will be that he be expelled.

“All people in public life, irrespective of politics should be united in condemning the fatal and dreadful attack on Jo Cox.

“This is not the time for inappropriate remarks, however intended, and I will not tolerate them in my Group, and residents should expect their elected representatives to act in an appropriate and compassionate way.

"I will also be asking the Group to make a contribution to the Memorial Fund set up in the name of Jo Cox.”

Tomorrow, which would have been Mrs Cox’s 42nd birthday, there will be a global celebration of her life and the causes she fought for.

Family, friends and colleagues will lead the tributes by gathering to remember her at 4pm in Trafalgar Square as part of the “More in Common” movement which has sprung up since the atrocity last Thursday.

Similar events are taking place at Glastonbury, New York, Sydney, Beirut, Buenos Aires, Brussels and many other locations as part of a “worldwide celebration” of the Labour MP and former humanitarian worker.

A memorial will also take place in her Yorkshire constituency of Batley and Spen as all the gatherings remember Jo’s “warmth, love, energy, passion, flair, Yorkshire heritage, and her belief in the humanity of every person in every place”.

