Questions raised over ID card following Brexit

2016-6-24

BREXIT has thrown up all sorts of questions for Brits – including what happens to our important documents which are European Union branded.

Driving licences in the UK currently have the EU’s flag printed in the top left hand corner.

It was hoped the current format would standardise and replace the 110 different plastic and paper driving licenses of the 300 million drivers across the region.

But with Britain poised to leave the EU that may soon change and it is unlikely the design will stay the same.

It is understood the licence will remain valid while negotiations take place because the UK will still be part of the EU.

But what happens after that is not known – although it is more than likely a new design will be phased in as old documents expire.

For now UK drivers do not need to worry – any changes that occur will be phased in gradually.

The DVLA say the European Union flag has been displayed on full driving licences since photocards first came into use in July 1998.

Since then more than 132 million photocard licences have been issued.

After Britain leaves it is likely there will also be new British passports.

The document currently has“European Union” written at the top but that is likely to change.

Until then it is thought current passports will be valid for as long as it takes to negotiate the exit deal.

The vote for Brexit has already seen Prime Minister David Cameron resigning on the steps of Number 10.

In an emotional statement he announced his intention to step down in the coming months after Britain voted to leave the European Union.

Mr Cameron said he wanted a new leader to be in place by this autumn’s Conservative conference when he steps down after six years.

He said: "I do not think it would be right for me to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination."

Brexit caused stock markets around the world to tank.

London’s FTSE 100 plunged 7 per cent when it opened at 8am – but has since rallied.

The vote to leave is also threatening the unity of the United Kingdom with calls for a second Scottish Independence Referendum and to unite Ireland.

All 32 local authorities in Scotland delivered a vote for Remain.

First Minister Nicola Sturgeon said it is democratically unacceptable to take the UK out of the EU against the will of the Scots.

Northern Ireland, which is part of the United Kingdom, is now faced with the prospect of customs barriers for trade with EU-member the Republic of Ireland.

