Cameron blasts Brexit-backing Michael Gove for ‘Donald Trump’ style tactics in debate

2016-6-20

DAVID Cameron has lashed out at Michael Gove’s attack on experts to accuse him of “Donald Trump-style” politics.

Ramping his assault on Leave campaign bosses, the PM also accused them of “selling a fantasy” to voters and vowed to “call that out”.

The PM’s broadside is his most stinging yet on his fellow senior Tories and will only deepen the party’s bitter civil war.

Pro-Brexit Justice Secretary Mr Gove last month dismissed warnings from “establishment” economists such as the Bank of England against leaving the EU by saying: “People in this country have had enough of experts”.

Hitting back in his interview with Sun yesterday, Mr Cameron said: “The idea we should not listen to experts I think is very worrying for our future politics.

“If we are going into a ‘let’s not listen to anyone who knows what they are talking about’, it is just sort of Donald Trump-style, it is all going to be great.

“I worry."

The PM also insisted it would be a “tragedy” for Britain to walk away from Brussels because “people have been told things which are simply not true”.

He highlighted what he dubbed “three untruths” on most of Vote leave’s leaflets – narrowly stopping short of accusing Mr Gove and Boris Johnson of telling outright lies.

And he accused the Leave campaign of having “morphed into the UKIP campaign”.

Mr Cameron said: “All they are talking about is unless you leave, Turkey is going to join. Not true.

“They are being told unless you leave £350m a week is going to go to Brussels. Not true.

“They are being told we are going to be part of a European army. Not true.

“And they are endlessly talking about migration, often in a way that is designed to frighten, scare and divide people. And that is all that they are left with.”

Mr Cameron also vowed to spend the last 48 hours of the knife edge referendum campaign in a full-blown assault on Leave bosses Boris Johnson and Michael Gove to “call them out”.

The fired up PM told The Sun: “The saying a lie flies half across the world before the truth has got its boots on.

“I have got my boots on and I am explaining these things.

“We need to call that out. A lot of people as they come into the closing days of this campaign and they examine this fantasy that they are being sold actually see you unwrap the present and you see there is nothing in there.”

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368.

 

