Tory leader Ruth Davidson has Scot what it takes to lead Britain

2016-6-24

SO here we all are, staring into the abyss, with the hollow guffaws of Nigel Farage and the chortles of Boris Johnson ringing in our ears.

In Scotland and Northern Ireland the wishes of most citizens will be ignored and they’ll be dragged kicking and screaming out of Europe.

Ruth proved a force to be reckoned with during the Referendum

So who do we blame for all this angst and uncertainty?

Well, the referendum only happened because David Cameron was rattled by the bloated barfly that is Farage and his motley crew of Ukip fruit loops.

As a result we had one of the most divisive and toxic campaigns seen on these shores.

We saw some hateful, spiteful behaviour from people who should know better and in the middle of it all, a fine woman — MP Jo Cox — lost her life.

The referendum only happened because David Cameron was rattled by the bloated barfly that is Farage 

I spoke yesterday to a very disappointed Ruth Davidson Scottish Tory leader and a passionate campaigner for Remain.

She sensibly talked of making this a time for stability and for everyone to work together for the good of the country. Wise words. Ruth has been one of the most impressive politicians throughout this sorry saga, both north and south of the border.

If eligible, she would have been the ideal person to steady the ship now Cameron has effectively jumped.

There were also sights and scenes that made my brain want to explode.

The soon to be ex-PM joining forces with Jeremy Corbyn and Harriet Harman was a particular humdinger.

Lord knows what the campaigning cost, and you do wonder who the hell was actually running the country while all our politicians were visiting ball bearing factories in hi-vis jackets and shouting at one another on the telly.

It’s been the stuff of nightmares, with friends falling out, families squabbling and workmates vowing to never speak to each other again.

Like Cameron, Corbyn has to take his share of the blame.

He was so half-a**ed for Remain he was barely visible and there must surely be serious question marks over him continuing as Labour leader. It’s no surprise a group of MPs have issued a no-confidence motion in him.

Just as it did in Scotland, which left it with one lonely MP in the last General Election, Labour completely misjudged the voting intentions of its core support and is clearly completely out of touch in its Westminster bubble.

I’m actually beginning to suspect Corbyn might be a Ukip mole or “sleeper” spy for Brexit, judging by his lacklustre performance and his barmy call for us to start the process of withdrawing from the EU immediately.

Surely this is a time for cool heads and common sense. We have had enough of knee-jerk politics.

And what of the future of the United Kingdom?

Unlike Cameron, the SNP leader and First Minister Nicola Sturgeon won’t be bounced into a second Scottish independence referendum unless she is damned certain she will win. And as she announced yesterday that plans will be put in place for “Indy 2”, you can assume she is confident of victory.

And of course, the 62 per cent of Scots who voted to stay in Europe aren’t necessarily all pro-independence but ironically, thanks to the creation of Ukip and the fear it instilled in the Tories, the break-up of the UK is now surely inevitable.

Those who voted to leave should remember that after the celebration comes the big, fat hangover.

I don’t think my usual cure-all of paracetamol and a can of Irn-Bru will do the trick this time.

 

I  MET a shame-faced Zara Holland this week.

She’s the Miss GB who was stripped of her title after having sex on TV’s Love Island.

I was expecting a hard-faced reality show refugee with a big sense of entitlement.

Instead Zara, left, is a bright, softly-spoken girl who is mortified by what happened. She claimed the Miss GB organisers had given her permission to appear on the show but hadn’t specifically said she couldn’t have sex.

They probably thought they didn’t need to, which makes me wonder if they had ever actually seen the show. The whole premise is to find “love” and there is lots of hanky-panky.

Zara is actually a very sweet girl who was given too much champagne and had sex with a boy she fancied.

It was daft to do it on national TV. But in the crazy world we live in, Zara has become the most famous Miss GB ever. And if she plays her cards right, she could have a career following in the footsteps of Katie Price and Vicky Pattison, who have completely reinvented themselves.

The whole Kardashian phenomenon started with a sex scandal, so Zara could end up being hugely rich and famous

 


SIR Cliff Richard is angry – and I don’t blame him. His candid interview with old friend Gloria Hunniford this week revealed the extent of his torment over allegations of historical sex abuse.

I felt desperately sorry for him when he revealed that when people now ask for photos, he is very wary of putting his arm around them – his open nature has taken a battering. And his home was ransacked by police to such an extent that he put it on the market because he felt it was tarnished.

I hope the law now changes so people accused of crimes such as sexual abuse have their identity kept secret until they are charged.

Sir Cliff is effectively another victim of the vile Jimmy Savile. If the authorities hadn’t failed so miserably there, they wouldn’t have overreacted and put innocent men like Cliff, Jimmy Tarbuck and Jim Davidson through all the torment.

If Cliff has the stomach for it, I reckon he should sue and stop this from happening to anyone else.

In the meantime, he should concentrate on happier things, such as shooting a new calendar.

I’M SO chuffed  the bittersweet BBC2 comedy Mum has been commissioned for a second series.

Lesley Manville is  perfect as the recently widowed mum and her slow-burn romance with Michael (Peter Mullan) is a joy to watch.
You would have needed a heart of stone not to shed a tear when the pair tentatively held hands in last week’s finale.
I can’t wait until  series two.

 

FINALLY, American politicians have grown some balls and are taking on the loathsome National Rifle Association (NRA) and fighting for gun controls.

In the wake of the horrific massacre at a gay nightclub in Orlando, Florida, where 49 people were killed, a group of around 100 Democrats staged an unprecedented sit-in on the floor of the House of Representatives to demand action on guns. Clutching photos of victims of the Orlando shootings, there were chaotic scenes as the Republicans tried to gain control of the chamber.

It’s the first salvo in what is going to be a long, rough battle.

But it is also a real glimmer of hope against the previously all-powerful and unassailable gun lobby. I am so bone-weary of those sad individuals who believe owning machine guns makes them powerful, quoting their right to bear arms from the 1791 Second Amendment of the US Constitution.

Times change, and although it is agonisingly slow, maybe America will be able to stop any further massacres of the innocent.

