Brexit boss BoJo is tipped to take over as Prime Minister, but he refuses to say he’ll run

2016-6-24

PRIME Minister-in-waiting Boris Johnson yesterday kept tight-lipped over feverish speculation that he will succeed David Cameron.

Pals of the Brexit boss insisted he had yet to make up his mind if he wanted the top job, despite senior Tories branding him “unstoppable”.

One MP and confidant of Boris told The Sun: “Today has been a hell of a shock for him.

“Deep down, he didn’t think this was going to happen because he didn’t really think Leave was going to win.

“He’s also pretty upset for David, because he has known and liked him for a very long time.

“Boris needs a little bit of time and space to reflect and work out whether he really does want to jump.”

But while BoJo bids to play coy over the weekend, another senior Tory MP described him as “very difficult to resist”.

He added: “Like him or not, few of us can see beyond Boris.

“He really threw himself into the Leave campaign, and he was head and shoulders the best campaigner above all the others. Who is going to stop him?”

Members of the backbench 1922 Committee will hammer out rules for the Tory leadership contest this weekend.

Boris is expected to declare his hand early next week, and could be challenged by up to a dozen rivals.

Earlier yesterday the former London Mayor faced a hostile crowd ahead of his speech on Leave’s victory.

Among the throng of media and well-wishers gathered outside his North London home, one passer-by yelled “t**t”.

A crowd of around 40 cyclists then blocked his car from leaving.

Others taunted him with shouts of “Where are you going, Boris?” and “Scum!” One man yelled: “The Pound is down — what do you say about that? Is the UK going to be all right, Boris, mate? Come on, man up!”

When he finally arrived at Leave’s Westminster HQ, Boris got a warm welcome from supporters including cabinet ministers Michael Gove and Chris Grayling plus Tory MEP Dan Hannan.

Speaking two hours after Mr Cameron signalled he would quit, BoJo abandoned his usual joke-laden speeches and tried to strike a serious tone.

He said: “I know I speak for Michael in saying how sad I am that he has decided to step down. Obviously I respect that decision, I have known David Cameron for a very long time and I believe he has been one of the most extraordinary politicians of our age.

“A brave and principled man who has given superb leadership of his party and his country for many years.”

He said it was Mr Cameron’s bravery that gave the country the chance to vote on membership of the European Union.

BoJo went on to praise the public, saying: “Today, I think all of us politicians should thank the British people because in a way they have been doing our job for us.”

“They hire us to deal with the hard questions and this year we gave them one of the biggest and toughest questions of all.”

Attacking his critics, he blasted suggestions it was wrong for the public to have been asked to decide the issue.

He said: “I believe it was entirely right and inevitable and indeed that there is no way of dealing with a decision on this scale except by putting it to the people.

“In the end, this question is about the people.

“It is about the right of the people of this country to settle their own destiny.

“It is about the very principles of our democracy — the rights of all of us to elect and remove the people who make the key decisions in their lives.

“And I think that the electorate have searched in their hearts and answered as honestly as they can.”

Justice Secretary Mr Gove also said Mr Cameron deserved to be “remembered as a great Prime Minister”.

I think that the electorate have searched in their hearts and answered as honestly as they can

In an awkward phone call early yesterday, Mr Cameron had rung his former ally Mr Gove to congratulate Vote Leave on its win and to inform him of the imminent announcement.

Pals of Mr Gove have said he is “in pieces” about the rift between them and he looked noticeably moved at yesterday’s hastily-organised event.

Mr Gove was godfather to the PM’s six-year-old son Ivan who died in 2009, but the pair traded bitter blows during the referendum.

Senior Tories last night branded George Osborne’s chances of winning the leadership contest as “non-existent”.

The Chancellor is tainted by his backing of the Remain vote.

One MP said: “A donkey would beat George if it made the last two with him”.

Meanwhile, former Arsenal and Liverpool footballer Jermaine Pennant, 33, asked if the Brexit meant England could play in “Euro 2018”.

His Twitter followers quickly pointed out the World Cup is in 2018 with the Euros in 2020.

Pennant, currently playing in Singapore, deleted the tweet and claimed it was a wind-up.

But one fan wrote: “Yeah of course you were joking. Trying too hard, lad.”

 


EDUCATION Secretary Nicky Morgan's allies have been setting tongues wagging in Westminster this morning over her intention to enter the race.

Until recently George Osborne would also have been a favourite to succeed Mr Cameron, but his chances have been hit by the Brexit result and a series of embarrassing Commons defeats.

This has left the door open for Theresa May to be considered as the possible candidate to unite the party.

His great appeal is his ability to win elections. Against the odds he took City Hall and he gambled his career on leading Britain out of the Brexit door.

As the figurehead of the Vote Leave campaign it follows that has country-wide appeal, with 17.5million voters backing Brexit.

But while immensely popular with the Tory grassroots, Boris is short of a few friends in the parliamentary party and he'll need them if he is to get through the first round of leadership contest.

But it would be a stretch to imagine a Tory leadership contest without  his blonde bonce in the scrum.

The Chancellor has endured a torrid EU referendum campaign, having to do much of the peddling of Remain’s Project Fear economic doomsday Brexit forecasts.

Before that he also faced a series of embarrassing Commons defeats and earlier this month 65 Tory MPs roundly rejected his proposals for an emergency “Brexit budget” calling it “absurd”.

It is thought he will have to be moved in a Cabinet reshuffle to another post.

Once seen as the natural successor to David Cameron’s throne and the continuity candidate, his odds will have plummeted after Brits voted Brexit.


The Home Secretary kept her head down during the EU referendum, so much so that she was criticised by some within the party for failing to pull her weight.

Seen by some as the unity candidate, the “Ice Queen” and reluctant Remainer has leapfrogged Osborne as the likely candidate to take on Boris in a leadership race.

Despite being the longest serving Home Secretary in 100 years, her "lack of star quality" could cost her when it comes down to votes from the Tory grassroots.

She recently appointed respected political hack Joey Jones, sparking speculation she is putting together her team in time for a leadership challenge.


The other Brexiteer to be in with a shot at the title.

Popular with Tory MPs but disliked by the public, support among the Conservative membership has swelled for the Justice Secretary during the campaign, with 31 per cent backing him for leader.

He has always claimed he is not interested in the leadership but now with his close friend Cameron cleanly dispatched he might reconsider,


Considered a rank outsider for the top job. The Education Secretary announced her intention to run last year once Mr Cameron stepped down.

Selling herself as “Mrs Normal” she has said she wants to see a “female leader of a main Westminster political party”.

She is not fancied as a favourite at the bookies.

*Paddy Power odds



Candidates must apply to the chairman of the 1922 backbench committee in the wake of David Cameron's resignation.
The 330 Tory MPs then thin the field to two candidates by nominating their preferred candidates.
The pair's names are then put to the Conservative party membership numbering around 150,000 who ultimately decide.

