Brother of MP Jo Cox murder suspect insists he is ‘not a violent man’

2016-6-17

THE brother of the man arrested over the murder of Labour MP Jo Cox has insisted he is "not violent".

Scott Mair, brother of suspect Tommy Mair, said he is "struggling to believe" the brutal killing.

Jo, 41, was dragged to the floor by her hair and then shot several times with an antique pistol, according to witnesses.

Her death has led to the suspension of all EU referendum campaigning and an outpouring of sympathy from politicians across all parties.

She was holding an advice surgery for her constituents in Birstall, West Yorks yesterday afternoon when she was attacked outside the local library.

Witnesses have told how the alleged killer, named as 52-year-old Tommy Mair, wrestled her to the ground before shooting her at point-blank range.

He is then said to have calmly stood over her and reloaded after each shot before firing a bullet to her head.

He is then accused of stabbing the married mum-of-two at least seven times, reportedly shouting "Britain first" throughout the assault.

One of the witnesses who initially claim they heard the remark has since denied it.

Jo later died of her wounds after being airlifted to Leeds General Infirmary.

Scott Mair said: “I am shaken by this. 

“We are struggling to believe what has happened. 

"My brother is not a violent man."

Responding to eyewitness accounts that said Tommy screamed "Britain first", possibly referring to the right-wing anti-immigration group, Scott told The Mirror his brother "is not that political."

"We don’t even know who he votes for", he said.

"I am so sorry for the MP and her family", he continued.

"I’ve no idea how he got the gun."

Tommy Mair's half-brother Duane St Louis has also revealed more about the prime suspect's mental health, saying he cleans himself with brillo pads.

“His only mental problem is OCD, he keeps cleaning himself all the time, he has had it for years”, he said.

Tommy was arrested by armed police after fleeing the scene on foot.

He was cornered by cops at a cul-de-sac in Birstall about a mile away from the attack.

Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

