With a marathon EU referendum night ahead The Sun gives its guide to how everything will go

2016-6-22

IT’S going to be a rollercoaster ride of a night.

And counting could go on for 12 painful hours before we know who has won the Referendum if the final result is close.

Tallying up a maximum record total of 46,499,537 votes begins as soon as polling stations close at 10pm.

LIVE UPDATES: For all the latest on the referendum results

It will be done by hand, at 382 local council and authority centres across the whole country.
Each will make their own public declarations, and pass on their results to 12 regional centres.

The final official declaration will be made at the national centre, Manchester Town Hall.
Officials have promised it will be by breakfast time — but not specified when that is.
Here is The Sun’s guide to how Westminster’s Longest Night will go:

10pm: Voting stations close. There will be a poll from YouGov of postal votes at this time and this will be broadcast on Sky News.

But there will not be a traditional exit poll from broadcasters’ like there would be in a general election.
Unlike general elections, there is no previous data to work out swings and make an accurate forecast.

12.30am: Sunderland is expected to be the first council to declare. Will give a key indication of which way the traditional Labour voter in the North has gone.

Leave expected to be ahead, but if their lead is in double digits we will be heading for Brexit.

1am: Wandsworth and City of London likely to be next. As two of the capital’s most affluent areas, Remain should have a strong lead of at least 20 points in both.

Swindon also expected to declare. A key Tory/Labour swing town that David Cameron won at last year’s General Election, but has the PM done enough this time?

Expected to favour Leave marginally.

First indication of turnout to be released. Expected to be high, at least as big as the 2015 General Election at 66.4 per cent — and as much as 70 per cent.

1.30am: Newcastle expected to declare. Marginally favours Remain but also a traditional Labour stronghold, so a big relief for the In campaign if they can win it.

Wigan and Hartlepool will declare soon after.

Gibraltar expected to declare too. Will be Remain’s strongest result, with all but a handful of its 20,000 voters backing In.

2am: Total turnout confirmed. That will give the magic number of votes each side will need to win (half of them, plus one).

Results from Neath Port Talbot expected, giving a sign of whether the Leave campaign has been successful in convincing local steelworkers they are better off out of the EU.

Nuneaton, a key swing seat in general elections, also expected around now — giving a further sense of which Tories Mr Cameron has managed to win over or lose.

Northern Ireland’s first declarations expected, probably the four Belfast constituencies.

Should be won by Remain, but many Unionists voting for Leave in the hope of strengthening the Irish border.

2.30am: Results will be coming in thick and fast by now.

3am: The PM’s home council of West Oxfordshire expected to declare. Split down the middle, but if Leave win it comfortably Mr Cameron is in deep trouble.

At least one constituent, TV presenter and Sun columnist Jeremy Clarkson, is voting Remain.

Cambridge, a Remain stronghold, is expected to announce alongside firmly Eurosceptic Peterborough.

3.30am: Results for Dumfries and Galloway expected.

Seen as Leave’s best chance of preventing a Remain clean sweep north of the border.

The SNP would exploit a full house of stay results in Scotland if the rest of the UK leads us out of Europe.

4am: The first of 12 regional declarations on stage expected, once all their councils have reported.

Half the results should be in by now.

Cardiff, Leeds, Sheffield and Manchester will all announce their results in the next hour.

Havering, East London — the most Eurosceptic borough in the country — also comes through at this time. By now, many of the places most likely to want Out are likely to have declared.

4.30am: Birmingham is expected to declare.

The largest area with 700,000 votes up for grabs, so a major prize. Split down the middle.

5am: Edinburgh and Glasgow expected to declare. Two of the strongest Remain areas in the country, and will deliver a large late rush of votes to In’s tally.

If Remain or Leave are heading for a comfortable victory, the TV broadcasters may start calling it around now.

5.30am: A handful of cities will still be left to declare including Bristol, Bath and Leicester.

7am: Electoral Commission Chief Counting Officer Jenny Watson could make official declaration at Manchester Town Hall.

8am to 11am: The PM will address the nation from the steps of No10 once the official result in known, probably around 10am if it is close.

If it’s Remain, he will offer olive branches to Brexiteers but if it’s Leave will Mr Cameron announce his resignation?

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368.

 

