Michael Gove insists PM will wave Turkey through to join EU despite UK veto claim

2016-6-16

DAVID Cameron will wave Turkey through to join the EU despite his promise of a British block, Michael Gove insisted last night.

The PM has repeatedly argued that the UK has a veto over Ankara’s membership application.

But Mr Gove – one of his closest friends – still told a live TV audience it would not be used by him.

The withering accusation during Mr Gove’s prime-time grilling saw him come close to accusing the Prime Minister of outright lying, with just seven days to go until the landmark referendum vote.

During the 45-minute BBC1 Question Time special, the Justice Secretary insisted the Leave campaign was “absolutely not” scaremongering with warnings that Turkey and its 77 million population is set to join the EU.

As host David Dimbleby argued Mr Cameron said Britain had a veto, Mr Gove replied: “Of course the Prime Minister does say that. The point is the Government has no intention of using that veto, because Government ministers have said that they are the strongest advocates of Turkish membership of the European Union and we are spending money on securing it.

“It will inevitably happen in our lifetimes unless we vote Leave on June 23.”

In a bid to step up the pressure on the Premier, Mr Gove and Boris Johnson wrote to him last night to demand to know the UK’s position on Turkey joining.

Talks on its membership are due to re-start on June 24 – the day after the UK’s In-Out referendum – after British diplomats ditched their opposition.

In the most emotive exchange of his appearance, Mr Gove mounted a passionate defence of his ageing father after the 79-year-old was dragged into a smear row.

The irate Justice Secretary accused pro-Remain campaigners of “belittling his suffering” for doubting whether Ernest Gove’s fishing business collapsed because of biting EU quotas.

The Guardian last night alleged that Michael Gove’s revelation two weeks ago about how the family firm “went to the wall” is untrue.

Labour MPs leaped on the story to insist the Leave campaign “has dodgy claims and dishonesty at its core”.

But hitting back when quizzed about the claim by BBC1 show host David Dimbleby, Mr Gove said: “My dad was rung up by a reporter from The Guardian, who tried to put words in his mouth.

“I know what my dad went through when I was a schoolboy and I don’t think that the Guardian or anyone else should try to get a 79-year-old man to serve an agenda instead of being proud of his son.”

Coming to his son’s aide, Ernest Gove himself said last night: “Our membership of the European Union inflicted incredible damage on Scotland’s fishing industry. My business closed as a result.

“I will be voting to leave the European Union on June 23rd and am proud of the role my son has played in making the case to leave.”

Mr Gove used the programme to try to paint a positive picture for Brexit in contrast to what he dubbed as the Remain campaign’s “scare stories”.

Britain breaking away from Brussels would mean the country would become “a progressive beacon for the world”, he said, and it would “affirm our faith in democracy”.

The studio audience pushed Mr Gove to come up with more details on what Brexit would mean.

Facing some tough questions, he conceded the economy could hit trouble during in the turbulent aftermath of the UK’s EU departure.

Mr Gove admitted: “If we leave the European Union, yes, there will be bumps in the road inevitably.

“You are absolutely right, everything in life has risks.”

And even if Britain did vote to leave, Mr Gove said it may be at least five years before immigration could be brought under control and the Tories could fulfil their manifesto pledge to reduce net arrivals to below 100,000 a year.

The Justice Secretary said a Brexit vote would mean the UK would leave the EU “by 2020”, leaving the government able to “hit our target in the next Parliament”.

A female English literature student told him: “All I’ve heard from you is manipulation.

“What are you actually going to do? It’s easier to talk than walk”.

And a middle aged woman told Mr Gove his words sounded “very convincing”, but she feared he may still be “a wolf in a sheep’s clothing”.

Yet again Gove whacked it out of the park tonight - bravo #VoteLeave #bbcqt

In an attack on Tory big beast Lord Heseltine, Mr Gove also branded it “wrong” to call the British people allies of controversial US billionaire Donald Trump and French National Front boss Marine Le Pen “simply because they want to get immigration under control”.

Tweeting his support afterwards, anti-EU ally Boris Johnson said: “Yet again Gove whacked it out of the park tonight – bravo”.

The second BBC1 Question Time special will be on Sunday with David Cameron making the case for a Remain vote.

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team?
Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368.

 

