Will David Cameron be forced to resign if we vote to Leave the EU?

2016-6-21

DAVID Cameron’s future as Prime Minister hangs in the balance no matter how Brits vote in the EU referendum on June 23.

Either he will have reluctantly handed Britain the keys to the EU exit door or he has to begin the mammoth task of repairing a Tory party which has been tearing itself apart for the last few months.

He has repeatedly insisted he will stay on as PM regardless of the result, but it might not be up to the PM come Friday.


Cameron has campaigned passionately for the UK to stay in the EU and a vote to Leave would be a huge rejection of his stance on the biggest political question Britain has faced in decades.

Some lifelong Eurosceptics have made little secret of their desire to see the back of Cameron and are furious with what many have branded “Project Fear”.

They have also accused the PM of an “establishment stich-up” with the Bank of England, IMF and the Treasury all warning of the dangers of leaving the EU.

Despite Tory grandee Ken Clarke saying the PM “wouldn’t last more than 30 seconds” if he loses the vote, it seems unlikely he will be getting the movers into Downing Street in the immediate aftermath.

Leading Brexit figures like Michael Gove, Chris Grayling and Liam Fox have all said they want Cameron to stay on post June 23 – if only for a period of “stability” and to lead the complex negotiations with the EU over the UK’s withdrawal.

Boris Johnson has said: “Whatever happens at the end of this – and I've said this to the prime minister – he's got to stay."

While he might be saying it with his fingers crossed behind his back, Leavers will not want the EU referendum to seem like a big conspiracy cooked up to turf Cameron out of No10.

Three Tory MPs have openly called for the PM to resign, but they will need a total of 50 fellow Conservative MPs to write letters of no confidence to the chairman of the 1922 Committee of Conservative backbenchers.

That would trigger a vote of no confidence in the PM which he would almost certainly win, allowing him to continue as PM. But his authority would be crippled and rebel MPs would threaten to block any future legislation in the Commons - turning him into a lame duck PM.

If he is forced to step down we would then have a Tory leadership race on our hands, with George Osborne, Boris Johnson and Theresa May the favourites to succeed Cameron.

In the unlikely event of a resounding victory for the PM, he will have won the confidence of the British people and a leadership coup by bitter Eurosceptics would seem unlikely.

But he will have the task of healing his party’s wounds after repeated blue on blue attacks. What to do with the senior Brexiteers who stepped out of line?

A brutal revenge reshuffle seems off the table, but the PM is being urged to carry out a “unity reshuffle”, offering Leavers who have played by the rules a promotion while canning some of the more aggressive campaigners.

Culture Secretary John Whittingdale, defence minister Penny Mordaunt and employment minister Priti Patel are all judged to have overstepped the mark in their attacks on the government and have been earmarked for the sack, according to No10 insiders.

Leader of the Commons Chris Grayling and Justice Secretary Michael Gove seem safe from the chop.

The biggest headache is what to do with BoJo. Sources have suggested Boris could be in line for one of the cabinet top jobs, but some Remain campaigners are said to be spitting feathers at the prospect.

One pro-EU minister said: “People who backed the Prime Minister and made the case for the EU would be outraged to see people who attacked the Government getting promoted.”

It could all come down to the margin of victory at the polls. A narrower win could see a kinder treatment of Brexiteers.

The Government has a majority of just 12 in the Commons, meaning bitter Brexiteers could cause the PM a few headaches if they are cast out.

