Huge voter survey reveals EU referendum is on a knife edge as a THIRD of Brits are still undecided

2016-6-20

A THIRD of all Brits are still not totally convinced how to vote in the knife-edge EU referendum with just 48 hours to go, a massive survey has found.

The online voter advice test by tech firm Crowdpac has also revealed the race is still almost tied, with 50% currently backing Leave and 49% for Remain.

A huge total of 567,998 people underwent the sophisticated test, devised by former No10 strategy chief Steve Hilton.

Once their responses were weighted for national balance, a total of 68% were found to have a firm view on how to vote.

But even at this late stage, 31% said they found arguments on both sides persuasive – meaning there could still be all to play for.

The huge number of respondents also allowed Crowdpac to produce detailed regional breakdowns of voting intentions on Thursday.

Scotland and London are the country's two areas that will overwhelmingly vote to stay in, and the North, the East and the Midlands will definitely vote to get out.

But the South East, the South West and Wales are split almost down the middle.

Other cities including Glasgow, Bristol, Sheffield, Brighton, York, Exeter and Cardiff all lean strongly toward In.

But smaller towns like Barnsley and Grimsby lean toward Out, as do places like Bournemouth, Southampton, Plymouth, Northampton and Milton Keynes.

Meanwhile, Liverpool, Newcastle, Birmingham and Coventry are divided.

In a boost to the Leave campaign, the Crowdpac survey also found Brexit has a slight lead overall on the economic arguments – which Remain bosses consider their strongest point.

Instead, the In campaign has a lead on questions of society and identity.

Crowdpac CEO Steve Hilton said: “This is the biggest ever survey of British voters and it shows it’s all to play for as the referendum campaigns move into the crucial final phase.

“The Crowdpac survey is not like normal polls -- the result comes after voters have completed a questionnaire with all the main arguments presented objectively.”

The findings come as a new poll today gives the Remain campaign a six point lead, by 53% to 47%.

The survey by academics NatCen Social Research was carried out over the last month.

This is the biggest ever survey of British voters and it shows it’s all to play for as the referendum campaigns move into the crucial final phase

Bookies said they took a surge of bets for Remain yesterday.

Ladbrokes increased the chances of Britain staying in to 74% as they shortened the odds on the outcome down to 2/7, and pushed a Leave vote out to 11/4, with a 26% chance.

Ladbrokes Head of Political Betting Matthew Shaddick said: “Looking closely at the figures, the proportion of money being placed on Leave hit its peak a couple of weeks ago.

“The picture certainly looks significantly different to last Monday.”

Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

