My heart says Brexit but my head is telling me it’s a step that will end in economic catastrophe

2016-6-18

SO the week has finally come when we vote in the referendum to decide whether Britain should remain in – or leave – the European Union.

I don’t need to tell you it’s not a simple decision to make.

And I’m sure you, like most ­people, have a battle going on between your head and your heart.

Certainly, I’m feeling a struggle.

My heart is saying, “I love my country, I want to protect it.

“We don’t want anyone telling us what to do and we’d be OK on our own.”

My mind, though, is telling me to overrule my heart.

Sure, being part of the EU is far from perfect.

I’m under no illusion.

But there simply isn’t a convincing enough argument to leave it either.

To take the plunge and leave is a step so riddled with uncertainty that only chaos, confusion and economic catastrophe can result.

I know some people are talking about the “short-term pain” of disentangling ourselves from the EU, but that “short-term” pain could take five years.

Believe me, a lot of disruption and mayhem can happen in five years.

One of the biggest concerns, understandably, is immigration.

But some people seem to think if they vote Leave, we’ll return to the Britain of the Fifties with milk floats doing the rounds in the morning and all of us knowing our neighbours, that we will somehow “close the door”.

But in our hearts I think we all know that the Britain of old will never come back.

People’s biggest beef about immigration, rightly, is the whole “something for nothing” culture.

Reading stories about immigrants who get six-bedroom houses, cars and goodness knows what else, it’s no wonder we feel annoyed.

I’m pretty sure that is what people who vote Leave are voting against.

But voting Leave will not address that issue.

We want people to want to come here but to have basic principles.

We want them to speak English and integrate with our community and we want them to get a job, pay taxes and put something back.

That’s why the system is changing.

David Cameron’s negotiation that immigrants can’t get benefits for four years, and that European immigrants without a job should be sent home after six months, is a better solution than leaving the EU — and losing our access to the prestigious single ­market, which will crash the economy.

It’s important not to underestimate the security we gain from being able to trade freely in Europe.

It’s also the spark and opportunity that many entrepreneurs need to get going.

By being part of Europe, every entrepreneur has free access to a market of 500million people, which gives new businesses vital security.

If we leave and are on the outside of that but still want to benefit from free trade, we will have to make serious concessions to be able to do that, such as the freedom of movement.

We will end up back where we started but without having a seat at the table to make decisions.

Small British businesses overwhelmingly want to stay in Europe as they don’t have the huge resources and budgets that big businesses can fall back on to deal with lots of ­different rules and regulations.

As part of the single market they can trade in Europe without needing that.

That’s why more than three-quarters of small businesses want us to stay in Europe.

If we leave they won’t flourish and thrive in the way they are able to now.

Don’t forget that 99 per cent of businesses in Britain are small.

They are the lifeblood of our economy.

We won’t get another vote in a few years 

If we left Europe we’d be cutting these small businesses off from that single market.

That would be a blow to entrepreneurs.

Instead of having free access to a market of more than 500million, it would be cut down to 65million.

All of a sudden that plan to invest or take on new employees would look that much riskier.

For many businesses, the uncertainty would mean it would not happen and that opportunity would be missed.

Also, it’s entrepreneurs who create jobs, not the Government.

So what’s bad news for them is bad news for people across the country.

We all remember the impact the last recession had on young people.

They could leave school having worked hard in their exams and still struggle to find work.

With nine out of ten economists warning our economy would take another hit if we leave, why would we risk seeing that all over again?

Make no mistake, it is our kids and grandkids who will pay the price for bad decisions we make.

Everyone wants to make sure their children can get on in life if they work hard.

The only way to secure that is to keep our economy strong and back business by staying in the single market and remaining in Europe.

This vote is irreversible.

Unlike a General Election, we won’t get another vote in a few years.
If we leave, there’s no going back.

In my opinion, it’s simply not worth the risk.

 

I LAUGHED at seeing the photos of the size 14 woman showing how impossible it was to squeeze into a pair of “unrealistically small” size 16 trousers in H&M, above.

Let’s face it, we’ve all been there.

Let’s just say that no normal woman over 30 should ever try to shop at the likes of H&M unless they are prepared to buy size 18.

And words don’t do justice to the gloom that goes with that experience.

Conversely, though, what about that thrilling feeling you get when you find yourself fitting effortlessly into a size, or even two sizes, smaller than the one you normally wear?

In my experience, this moment usually happens in Marks & Spencer or Hobbs.

Like most women, I’ve been shopping for summer clothes lately.

Either there’s that horrible moment when you put something on and think, “Oh my God, I’m HUGE”, or you slip effortlessly into a size down – and feel so good about yourself you go and have a cream cake.

Isn’t it silly.

Even though the interpretation of size by different brands varies wildly, there is an indisputable psychological punch that goes with having to go up a size that most women struggle with.

But we all know sizing is often nothing but a branding exercise.

(My mum will never forget going into Karen Millen and asking for a size 16 and being met with a silence frostier than Mr Whippy.)

The truth is, of course, it doesn’t matter what size you are and unless there are strict measurement guidelines implemented by law, companies will feel free to “interpret” them at will.

Let’s face it, the UK is full of far more Rebel Wilsons than there are Kate Mosses.

So don’t let yourself get caught up by what is really just a number in a label.

There is no point trying to squeeze into a size because you can’t bear to try a size bigger.

The good news is the size is not written on the outside, so no one needs to know.

 

IT’S always such a relief when celebrities lose weight but refuse to give up wine.
Like Oprah Winfrey, above, who looks amazing after losing 30lb.

But I’m sorry to say – and believe me, I only know this from bitter experience – it’s one thing to lose it and quite another to keep it off.

And the fact that Oprah, the original yo-yo dieter, can’t give up wine or bread is probably the thing that makes it harder than ever to keep the weight off.

Still, you know my motto: A little bit of what you fancy . . .

And don’t forget the one thing everyone on a diet has in common – they are miserable.


AREN’T we lucky to have all these fabulous ­sixtysomething role models, the latest being Christie Brinkley?

She is phenomenal and I don’t know how she does it.

It just goes to show that it’s all in the genes because no matter how much surgery you have, you’d never look like that.

Sure, she obviously looks after herself.

And yes, she is the poster girl for growing old gracefully – for not trying too hard or aiming to be something she is not.

But what really strikes me about this photo is how happy she looks.

You really can’t put that in a bottle or syringe.

Mind you, I’d be happy if I looked like her.

