After David Beckham publicly backs Remain does this mean he and Victoria are split on how to vote in the EU referendum?

2016-6-21

VICTORIA Beckham was drawn into a spicy public feud over her past anti-EU views yesterday (TUE) after hubby David declared his support for Remain.

Becks kicked off a flurry of pro-EU endorsements from almost 50 sports stars with a plea for voters to stick with Brussels “for our children and their children”.

That was shared by Posh on social media who said she was “so proud of David”.

But Brexit campaigners unearthed a string of highly-eurosceptic statements Victoria made during a 1996 interview with The Spectator.

They included Posh raging: “The whole European Federal plan is ridiculous. We are patriotic. The single currency is an outrage. We want the Queen’s head — or the King’s head if we have a king — on our own coins.”

The Spectator branded her “the Bill Cash of the Spice Girls” after the hardline Eurosceptic Tory MP as she added: “The Euro-bureaucrats are destroying every bit of national identity and individuality. Let me give you an example — those new passports are revolting, an insult to our kingdom, our independence. We must keep our national individuality.

“Do you not care if some bloke in Germany is making decisions for us?”

The Leave.EU campaign group shared a picture of the comments, adding: “Should’ve listened to the missus, David.”

Should've listened to the missus, David. #LeaveEU pic.twitter.com/wZiiN5Ilqr

 

But Posh hit back on Instagram where she has 11.2 million followers, accusing Leave.EU of trying to “put a spin on quotes made 20 years ago about keeping or losing the pound”.

She added: “I have to say strongly my comments were not about this referendum and should not be misused in this way! I believe in my country, I believe in a future for my children where we are stronger together and I support the #remain campaign.”

The row overshadowed an attempt by the Remain camp to bombard voters with celebrity endorsements with just one day of campaigning left.

England legend Becks’ statement was followed by a renewed push by Sir Richard Branson before Rio Ferdinand also declared his support for Remain – saying the issue was so important it is the first time he will vote.

Greatest-ever jump jockey AP McCoy also declared for Remain, followed by a string of almost 50 sports stars and industry figures including World Cup-winning rugby ace Laurence Dallaglio, marathon world record holder Paula Radcliffe, and multiple Olympic gold medallist sailor Sir Ben Ainslie.

Urging people to stick with the EU, they wrote: “In sport, the one thing that matters above all else is your team.

"Whether on the football pitch or running track, in the pool or in the gym, you can achieve so much more by working together.

"And the same is true for Britain in Europe: we are stronger working together with other countries with the ability to travel, work and play sport right across the continent.”

 

But leading Leave campaigner Michael Gove rushed back into a radio interview to counter that John Barnes and Sol Campbell support Brexit – only for Barnes to later say he backs Remain.

And referendum expert Professor Matt Qvortrup from Coventry University said Becks’ endorsement might actually backfire and cost votes, insisting: “It will not help Cameron”.

With just days to go until the crucial vote the PM welcomed Becks' "very moving statement"

David Cameron hailed Beckham's intervention as “very moving".

The Prime Minister said: “There was a very moving statement today from David Beckham talking about his children and saying how effectively, what he said to me was, ‘you can’t win in Europe, unless you're on the pitch’, and that's true.

“I worry about that as Prime Minister, I know that we sit around the table [with Europe] and make decisions about security and safety and fighting terrorism and all the rest of it, fighting climate change and if we leave they don’t stop meeting and making decisions that affect us, but they’ll be making decisions about us but without us in the room and that would be bad for Britain.”

 

Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

 

