Brexit: Is the Premier League about to welcome players from the far corners of the world at the expense of Euro talent?

2016-6-24

VOTERS opted to leave the European Union in a monumental decision on Friday morning.

As politicians, political commentators and the public were left wondering how the decision would affect them, football fans were wondering how it would affect the sport and the Premier League.

The short answer, as with most of the consequences of the decision, is that nobody truly knows - especially with membership in the EU to last for anything between two and 10 more years.

But one happy consequence could be an increase in the amount of South American talent we see in England.

With freedom of movement and freedom of labour laws now set to change after the referendum, European players may not be able to move to the Premier League so easily.

But that could open up opportunities for players from South America, Africa and Asia, who were previously subject to heavy restrictions on visas and work permits.

Brian Monteith of the Leave.eu campaign told the BBC: "The freedom of movement for people in the EU comes at the price of heavy restrictions on visas for potential signings from Africa, the Caribbean, South America and Asia.

"Once we leave the EU, the UK will be free to treat footballers from all countries equally, which will broaden the pool of talent for our teams, not reduce it."

European-born players will no longer have that work permit advantage over their non-European rivals, meaning Premier League clubs could be more inclined to look at talent further afield.

Work permit rules will likely be relaxed, experts predict - they are not laws but rather regulations agreed by the Football Association and the Home Office.

The current rules would have meant that some of last season's top stars, such as Dimitri Payet, N'Golo Kante and Anthony Martial, would not have been allowed to come to the Premier League.

But the rules are not black and white, with an appeals process to allow certain players (Willian in the past) in if they are exceptional talents who do not reach the criteria.

Another major boost for South American players, and perhaps young British players in academies, will be that Article 19 of FIFA's transfer regulations will also have to be changed.

That rule states that no players under the age of 18 are allowed to be transferred.

But European clubs have been able to get around that quite easily, with players from the EU and EAA allowed to move from 16.

The loophole allowed Arsenal to poach Cesc Fabregas and Hector Bellerin from Barcelona when they were that age.

It could mean good news for teams around Europe who no longer have to worry about big clubs hoovering up teenage talent before they ever make the first-team.

With those players no longer at Premier League clubs from such an early age, managers and scouts will surely have to look further for talent.

However, Premier League chief Richard Scudamore warned that Brexit could be bad news for the division.

Scudamore, along with all 20 clubs, threw their weight behind the remain campaign.

Broadcasting deals were negotiated for £5.14billion last year and Scudamore believes that the deals, which are for separate amounts for different nations, are reliant on a strong Premier League.

Earlier this year he said: "I believe we, in the UK, must be in Europe from a business perspective.

"I believe in the free movement of goods, but when it comes to services, we must be entitled, especially in the audio-visual world, to territorialism."

Costs could also increase for travelling supporters.

With air fares and train tickets predicted to increase, and British tourists likely needing visas, following your club on the continent will likely be more expensive than ever.

