Now Lady Green could be grilled by MPs over offshore family firms and tax affairs

2016-6-16

LADY Green could be hauled before MPs to be quizzed over secretive offshore family accounts after Sir Philip Green’s “Del Boy” defiance yesterday.

While the Topshop tycoon might have wriggled off the hook for the collapse of BHS, his bullish performance in front of MPs yesterday has led to calls for his wife to be grilled.

During a fiery six-hour exchange yesterday with a Commons committee the billionaire businessman, dubbed ‘Sir Shifty’ by critics, claimed he had never taken a look at the family firm’s accounts linked to Topshop, Dorothy Perkins and Miss Selfridge.

His performance sparked fierce criticism from MPs, with the SNP's Mhairi Black saying: "The arrogance and sexism is astonishing! Feel like I'm listening to Del Boy giving evidence."

“I have never made or moved 1p from any bank account of our company and I wouldn't even know where to call to get it out,” he said.

The sun-tanned ‘King of Retail’ also claimed his move to Monaco decades ago was nothing to with it being a tax haven, but had in fact been somewhere where he could recover from a health scare.

Last night Iain Wright, chairman of the Business, Innovation and Skills Committee, and Frank Field, chairman of the Work and Pensions Committee, issued a joint statement saying: “Today’s evidence raised a host of further questions.

“We want to get much more detail on the structure of various companies, particularly those owned by Lady Green, the profits they have made and tax they have paid.

“We have further questions for Sir Philip, particularly big questions on the pension fund he was unable to answer.”

Mr Wright added that MPs required “much more detail on the structure of various companies particularly those owned by Lady Cristina Green, the profits they have made and the tax they have paid”.

Lady Green is now expected to be summoned by the committee. It has been reported that Sir Philip only attended yesterday’s hearing on the condition that his wife would not be called.

She is the nominal owner of Sir Philip's Arcadia retail empire and his £3.2billion fortune. In 2005 she received a £1.2billion dividend.

She lives on a £40million superyacht moored on Monaco’s glittering coastline, allowing the couple to legally avoid an estimated £130 million tax bill on money extracted from BHS alone.

