Online retailer’s website and app is down causing panic among shoppers

2016-6-24

ONLINE shopping website Asos crashed overnight – and people are blaming Brexit for the problems.

Both the site and its app went down last night and were still not working this morning.

Oh well seems like #Brexit killed #ASOS website. https://t.co/Gztz6pCRo6 More seriously, what does it mean for #ecommerce?

Twitter users soon noted a correlation between Britain’s decision to leave the EU and Asos experiencing troubles.

One user wrote: “I know people are stressing about #Brexit but people need to focus on the real issues of today...#ASOS is down and we all should panic.”

Another tweeted: “Looks like #Brexit has claimed its first victim.. #Asos.”

One said: "So #Brexit happened and @asos is down and the world is ending. #imscared."

 

Last night ASOS’s Here to Help account tweeted that the IT gurus were "on it".

The website had a short statement which read: “Erm, 'scuse us, we need a little time out. The site isn’t currently available but we’re doing everything we can to get to back up soon!”

But the problems continued into this morning and online shoppers were still not able to get on the website.

So #Brexit happened and @asos is down and the world is ending. #imscared pic.twitter.com/jzdYjNAIIU

I know people are stressing about #Brexit but people need to focus on the real issues of today...#ASOS is down and we all should panic

I don't want to say that this is the apocalypse, but asos is down

Some thought the website's problems could be linked to financial turmoil on the stock market.

The historic referendum vote for Out stunned the world and saw more than £100billion wiped off the London FTSE 100.

The value of the pound crumbled as world markets were gripped by Brexit panic.

It plunged the financial markets into unprecendetned chaos.

Leave passed the threshold of 16.8million votes needed to trigger a Brexit just after 6am this morning.

The vote has split the country with Leave securing a margin of victory of 52 per cent to 48 per cent.

Only Scotland, Northern Ireland and inner city areas of London and Manchester voted by large majorities to Remain.

The final result saw 17,759,184 Brits vote to leave, while 16,580,508 backed remain.

Prime Minister David Cameron this morning announced he will resign following the shock result.

In an emotional address outside Downing Street, Mr Cameron revealed he wanted a new leader to be in place by this autumn’s Conservative conference.

The PM said: "I do not think it would be right for me to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination."

Flanked by wife Samantha, Mr Cameron added he had informed the Queen of his decision to remain in place for the short term.

He said: "The British people have voted to leave the European Union and their will must be respected.

"The will of the British people is an instruction that must be delivered."

An Asos spokesman said: "Yes, the site is down. This is because of a power outage at a third party data centre that hosts our servers.

"This has impacted other businesses hosted by the centre. Our tech team are working hard to restore services which involves replacing damaged hardware. That’s why it’s taking longer to get back online.

"We are keeping our customers informed on social media."

 

