Don’t trust David Cameron to curb immigration and reform the EU… and then vote Leave tomorrow

2016-6-22

DAVID Cameron begged Sun ­readers this week to vote to stay in the EU.

Today, we have our own message: DON’T let him or his Remain ­campaign fool you.

The Prime Minister has admitted defeat on immigration.

He has no answer to the pressure Britain’s vast annual influx places on working people’s wages, our schools, hospitals or housing costs.

Mr Cameron knew years ago he could never control the numbers while remaining in the EU.

Yet he shamefully continued promising voters he could.

Net legal immigration has soared to 333,000 a year.

Meanwhile mobs of illegal migrants force themselves aboard UK-bound lorries and ferries at Calais and only three boats patrol our entire coast hoping to stop others crossing the Channel.

But of all the falsehoods in this Referendum campaign, the PM topped the lot by claiming a Remain vote will empower him to bring about “reform” of the EU.

It will NEVER reform — as it proved at Mr Cameron’s failed renegotiation.

That was its chance to change.

Its leaders refused.

If Remain have won on Friday morning, the EU’s bureaucrats will clink their champagne glasses and move on with imposing yet more regulations.

They will ignore the increasing protests of voters here and across the continent and forge ahead with their long-held dream of a single EU superstate with full economic union and one army.

Britain will either be engulfed or left marginalised while still shackled to Brussels.

We are staggered Mr Cameron persists with his absurd claims about “reform”.

Either he is stupid or he thinks voters are.

He accuses Leave of “selling a ­fantasy” . . . but he is selling the biggest of them all.

So we can stay in the un­reformed EU.

Or we can Leave, reassert the sovereignty of Britain and re­establish the ­simple principle that we are governed by politicians we elect, not bureaucrats we don’t.

Mr Cameron made another desperate statement yesterday.

He didn’t mention immigration once.

Instead he fell back on his economic “experts” and their grim warnings about our fate outside the EU.

These are the same City fat cats and foreign bankers who tried to talk us into joining the euro years ago.

Instead we saved this country from ruin.

We are told the Pound will plummet against the dollar if we vote to Leave.

That’s GOOD news for our exports.

It means more jobs — and huge investments flowing in.

There will be more jobs too from Britain, the world’s fifth largest economy, trading independently with every other nation ­outside the EU.

That’s a ­market of seven billion people.

Mr Cameron calls this “quitting”.

We call it joining the rest of the planet and embracing the future.

If there is any short-term market instability, it will be less due to the verdict of the British people and more to the apocalyptic warnings from George Osborne and his Canadian Bank of England Governor Mark Carney.

Tomorrow’s vote is our one chance to escape the EU and be part of the real world.

It is not like a normal election, where half the constituencies are safe Tory or safe Labour seats.

The vast majority of Sun readers want out . . . and this time EVERY single vote will count.

Vote Leave tomorrow.

