Tony Blair, Sir John Major and Gordon Brown back David Cameron’s frantic final call for Brits to stay in EU

2016-6-22

ALL three living ex-Prime Ministers joined David Cameron last night to issue one final plea to Brits to stay in the EU.

The current PM was backed by Sir John Major, Tony Blair and Gordon Brown in his call on the nation not to risk economic turmoil by walking away from Brussels.

Mr Cameron ended a frantic and sleepless 24 hour bus tour of Britain with a final campaign rally in Birmingham last night.

His job is on the line if Brexit wins today’s poll, with MPs privately insisting he would have to resign.

Despite the pressure, the PM still insisted yesterday he would stay on in Downing Street to deliver the “instructions of the British people” whatever today’s result is.

Delivering his emotive final appeal in rolled up shirt sleeves, the Premier said he was boiling down his entire pitch to “one last word – together”.

Mr Cameron told a crowd of In supporters: “There isn’t one problem in the world that we can’t solve better by working together.

“That is what this vote is all about.

“I’m wildly patriotic about what this country can do in the future.

“The Britain I know doesn’t quit, it doesn’t walk away, it stands and fights.”

His Labour predecessor in No10 Mr Brown joined him on the rally podium to add: “We will be no less British as a result of cooperating with our neigbours.

“I want us to take control again so unity replaces division.”

Earlier in the day, Mr Cameron was joined on his tour by Sir John Major to bolster his plea to older voters to switch to Remain for their offspring’s sake.

The former Tory PM joked: “I represent the grey vote. Some say I always have done.”

Sir John added: ““I owe it to my children and grandchildren to look forward, because I want their freedoms to be secure”.

Mr Cameron let his nerves show at times yesterday and had a testy exchange with Radio 4’s John Humphrys.

The PM snapped at him during a live Today Programme interview: “”You will interrupt yourself in a minute John if you don’t watch it”.

He was also forced to deny that Britain is “shackled to a corpse” by staying in the EU, insisting: “You can see European economies recovering”.

Labour’s former deputy leader Harriet Harman spent all of yesterday on the PM’s battle bus with him in a show of cross-party unit.

But new Labour boss and Remain-backer Jeremy Corbyn refused to meet up with Mr Cameron despite hiw own party activists’ pleas.

While keeping away from the campaign trail yesterday, Tony Blair joined the other PMs to issue statements together, saying: “Britain faces a historic choice between prosperity, influence and security as part of Europe, or a reckless leap in the dark and years of damaging uncertainty.

“If we vote to leave, there is no going back.

“Voting Remain will secure Britain’s place as a proud, influential country with a strong economy and a bright future.”

