Boris Johnson tells The Sun’s cabbie Brits should send a massive signal to Europe by voting Leave

2016-6-19

BORIS Johnson has called on Brits to vote for Brexit to punish the EU for "cheating us” with a shoddy new deal.

In an interview with The Sun’s Cabbie, the former London Mayor said other European leaders refused to listen to the nation’s desperate appeal for tougher immigration controls.

Instead, the senior Tory insisted: “They tried to fob us off and it has not worked”.

Calling for Brits to vote to leave on Thursday, Mr Johnson also said Brexit would help the rest of the EU, adding: “It would be a massive, massive signal to the rest of Europe that now is the time for change”.

Boris also lashed out at Remain campaigners’ accusations that Brexit backers are racist as “incredibly offensive” during the interview in the back of the Sun Cab.

Brexiteers are actually on the “anti-racist side of the argument” because EU immigration rules are “incredibly discriminatory against people who don’t come from Europe”, he explained.

He also told real-life London taxi driver Grant Davis - who is still undecided how to vote - that Remain campaign bosses “are really trying to scare people” with doomsday scenarios of economic disasters under Brexit because they now fear defeat.

BoJo explained: “They are and less confident about the outcome.

“They are panicked about people suddenly looking up, lifting their eyes to the horizon and feeling a sense of confidence and excitement about what Britain can do”.

It was “absolute rubbish” that his stand against David Cameron was just so he could take over as Tory leader, Boris also claimed.

But he ducked Grant’s demands for guarantees that Brexit wouldn’t lead to job losses, and that Britain would be able to slash immigration to below 100,000 a year.

 

THE CAB INTERVIEW:

G: It is all getting a bit personal isn’t it? Last week, I was watching the telly and Amber Rudd, she said you are the life and soul of the party but she would not like you to be driving her home.

What did she mean by that? What does she know about you Boris? You are not a pervert are you?

B:  No, no. The crucial thing is that we are in a situation that we can’t control and at the moment.

It is though I have got into an unlicensed mini-cab, and the guy does not know which way to go, he does not speak very good English, and we are going into a destination I can’t control.

That is exactly what is happening now with the EU Grant.

G: If we come out, do you think that the rest of Europe - the people of Portugal, Spain - would demand a referendum like England?

B: I think it would be a massive, massive signal to the rest of Europe that now is the time for change. They tried to get away with cheating us. They tried to get away with zero change in negotiation. They tried to fob us off and it has not worked.  It will strike a blow for freedom and democracy if you vote on Thursday.

G: John Major has called you a court jester. Is that deserved?

B: People will try to reduce this debate to personalities, when what we need to do is focus on the issues, and the facts.

G:  How do you feel about them trying to give you a bit of kicking?

B: As we say in Brussels, donnez moi a break.

G: Sounds like something out of Only Fools and Horses.  What does that mean?

B: Gimme a break – it doesn’t matter at all what people say, provided we get the facts over and give people the choice.  This is not about politicians, this is about the people of this country finally having a choice to express their views.  They are coming centre stage now.

G: Lots of cabbies have said a lot worse.

B:  They certainly have, that is for sure.

G: Why do you think David Cameron said we could survive outside the EU and now he says we can’t?

B: Because I think they are panicked.  I think the Remain side is what we call jibbing.  They are panicked about people suddenly looking up, lifting their eyes to the horizon and feeling a sense of confidence and excitement about what Britain can do.

G: Listen, I want to talk to you about immigration Boris.  We know with David Cameron he has been saying that a few years ago he is going to get immigration down to under 100,000, and he can’t do it.

If we leave the EU, what guarantees can you give me and the readers of The Sun that you can get the immigration down?

B: What we can guarantee is that we can bring in a points based system, an Australian style points based system so that politicians are actually able to deliver on their promises.

At the moment people can stand up and say they are going to cut immigration to the tens of thousands when they do not have the legal ability to do that, and that is ridiculous.

G: What do you think about people saying that if you are an outer you are a bit of a closet racist, you are a little Jonny Englander?  Do you think they have got a point?

B: I think it is incredibly offensive.

G: Is there a bit of xenophobia creeping in the out campaign?

B: Absolutely not, because what we are calling for a balanced policy.  At the moment you could argue that the EU policy is incredibly discriminatory against people who don’t come from Europe and I think that is unfair. I think actually we are the anti-racist side of the argument.

G: People in the cab have said to me, you know what this is about?  And I go, no, go on tell me.  And they say, it is all about Boris wanting to be in Number 10. Being the new Prime Minister.

B: No.

G: What do you say to that?

B: Absolute rubbish. It suits people to try to turn it into a conversation about personalities.

G: You think Remain are losing the argument Boris?

B: I do. I think though that what we have seen in the last few days in particular is more and more panic by the In camp and I think they are less and less confident about the outcome, so they are really trying to scare people which is totally wrong.  You should not be running this country down, we can’t cope. We are a great country, we should believe in ourselves.

G: It has come to my attention Boris that you dye your hair. Is it true?

B: It is not. Unfortunately I thought the journalist in question was being ironic, so I gave what I thought was an ironic answer back.

G: I thought you said you reached for the platinum blond bottle.

B: No I don’t. I wouldn’t.  I never have done.

GRANT'S VERDICT ON BORIS:

“Boris is saying if we leave, it will be the promised land on everything. But is that really going to happen? I like him and I want to believe him, but I just don't know. What will we be left with if it all doesn't come true?”

