Boris Johnson backs David Cameron to stay on as PM no matter who wins referendum

2016-6-18

JO COX paid the ultimate price for the open society we live in, with our MPs living and working among us.

Despite this tragedy, though, democracy must go on.

This time next week, the country will have decided. Whichever way the vote goes, a period of stability will be needed.

This means David Cameron staying in place regardless.

There are already advanced plans under way to ensure that this happens.

Boris Johnson has signed a letter saying that whatever the result Cameron must stay on; making clear that he is not interested in any coup attempt.

Michael Gove, the most senior Cabinet member campaigning for a Leave vote, has also put his name to it.

Several of the other Cabinet Brexiteers have done the same.

Signatures are now being collected from Tory MPs.

I’m told that the organisers are confident of getting a three-figure number of MPs to back it.

Their aim is to make clear as soon as the polls close that there’s no realistic prospect of ousting Cameron.

The hope is that this will deter Tory malcontents from trying to gather the 50 names needed to force a vote of no confidence in him among Tory MPs.

Putting the Tory party back together again will not be easy, though.

After George Osborne published his Brexit “punishment Budget” on Wednesday, one Tory MP told the chief whip Osborne must be sacked for threatening to break so many manifesto pledges.

Fury in No 10 getting greater and greater

One Secretary of State has personally complained to the Prime Minister about the behaviour of a Minister campaigning for Out.

I am told that “the fury in Number 10 is only getting greater and greater” about the way in which the Leave campaign has exposed the Government’s vulnerability on immigration.

There’ll be no Cabinet shake-up straight after the referendum, I understand.

Instead, the “reconciliation reshuffle” will most likely take place in the autumn.

The Tory whips, whose job is to keep discipline in the party, believe that this delay will help ensure MPs’ good behaviour over the summer.

But it will take more than Tory politicians being nice to each other to bring the country back together again.

This referendum has exposed stark differences, not just splitting families but dividing the UK along lines of class, age and region.

It is increasingly looking as if England will vote out with the overall result being decided by how strongly Scotland votes In.

This will, of course, place a new pressure on the Union.

In this debate, too many people on both sides have been deaf to the concerns of others.

Too many have considered that they have a monopoly on either virtue, patriotism or wisdom.

On Thursday, people should go out and vote — and vote for what they think is best for them and this country’s future.

But we should all remember as we cast our vote that there are people of good will on both sides of this debate.

Because remembering that is one of the many things that makes this a truly special country.

 


 

THIS week’s Cabinet meeting was one of the oddest that those attending can remember.

The EU referendum was the elephant in the room.

They studiously avoided any discussion of it, or of any issue that could be linked to it.

Instead, they talked about the trouble at the football and the dangers of the Zika virus spreading to North America and Southern Europe.

But, revealingly, meetings of the political Cabinet – which include Boris Johnson – have been suspended until further notice.

THE House of Commons has a way of telling you who is particularly worth listening to.

There are certain MPs for whom the House will fall silent.

The barracking stops as MPs concentrate on what is said. Jo Cox was one of those MPs.

She might only have arrived in Westminster last year, but it didn’t take long for MPs to realise that they should listen to her.

MPs on all sides, those who agreed with her and those who disagreed, appreciated that she knew what she was talking about.

She argued with passion. But she was prepared to listen to other points of view too.

She never pretended that politics was simple. She was one of the first MPs to talk about British humanitarian intervention in Syria but abstained on the question of military action because she thought there wasn’t enough of a strategy behind it.

Cox was what we want our MPs to be: a smart, courageous person representing where they grew up who cared about local, national and international issues.

But as we mourn her, let us remember that the overwhelming majority of our MPs are good people, doing the job for the right reasons.

In the last decade, perhaps influenced by social media, too many of us have forgotten that we can disagree without being disagreeable.

We should all show each other a bit more respect.

 

HOW do you ensure your turn on Question Times goes well?

Charm the audience  beforehand.

David Cameron is doing Question Time tomorrow night after Michael Gove did it on Wednesday.

But Gove had a stroke of luck before he went on stage.

He was given the wrong directions, and found himself in the room where the audience were.

They were sitting round tables, chatting away and waiting to be shown into the studio.

Immediately, they started gathering round Gove, taking selfies with him.

But the Gove charm offensive was cut short when his minders extracted him from the room.

THERE are few fingernails left at Remain campaign HQ.

One Cabinet member tells me that the referendum is “spectacularly tight”.

But one person is soothing the nerves of Tory Inners right now: Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson.

“The voice of calm at the moment is Ruth saying this is exactly what it felt like in Scotland”, when independence was ahead shortly before the 2014 vote, one Cabinet Minister tells me.

The Scottish experience was that the last undecided voters will break towards the status quo on polling day.

This is why most IN supporting Cabinet Ministers remain confident of victory, albeit by the narrowest of margins.

Davidson will try and give some fresh legs to the Remain campaign on Tuesday night when she takes on Boris Johnson and co at Wembley Arena.

She’ll relish the task. She can’t stand Boris and will happily go for him in her blunt, no-nonsense way.

It is hard not to conclude that she’s been picked by Remain for this very reason.

Though, as Boris showed last week, he’s got good at soaking up pressure.

He’ll be as formidable as any of the opponents Davidson has faced up in Scotland.

 

BORIS JOHNSON has a plan for the eve of referendum day.

Starting at dawn, he’ll race round  Britain in a special Vote Leave helicopter.

His aim is to get to as many parts of the country  as possible in a day, getting the vote out for Leave.

It won’t so much be Challenge Anneka as  Challenge Boris.

