Monica Lewinsky ‘flew into a rage when she found Bill Clinton with ANOTHER mistress’

2016-6-19

MONICA Lewinsky once flew into a rage because she found Bill Clinton with ANOTHER of his mistresses, a former White House Secret Service agent has claimed.

Gary Byrne says that Miss Lewinsky was told that the President was "with another appointment" when she arrived to see him at the Oval Office.

Miss Lewinsky became offended and supposedly gestured towards her own body and said: "What’s he want with her when he has this?"

The other woman Mr Clinton was with was Eleanor Mondale, a TV journalist and daughter of Walter Mondale, a former Vice President who lost the Presidential election in 1984 against Ronald Reagan.

When Miss Lewinsky found out about it the news reportedly "really set her off", leading her to become "reckless" with her dalliances with the President.

In ‘Crisis of Character: A White House Secret Service Officer Discloses his Firsthand Experience with Hillary, Bill, and How They Operate’, Mr Byrne lifts the lid on working for the Clintons as the Secret Service agent stationed outside the Oval Office.

He claims that the President "multi-tasked" with at least three mistresses including White House intern Miss Lewinsky.

The book says that one Christmas he walked in on Miss Mondale and President Clinton "in a compromising position, that is, making out on the Map Room table".

Mr Byrne writes: "We wondered how he got any work done and joked that he would have been better at running a brothel in a red-light district than the White House".

The book says December 6 1997 Miss Lewinsky arrived to see the President - the official story was that she was to see his personal secretary.

But this time she was denied entry by the gate officer, according to Mr Byrne, who was stationed elsewhere but heard through colleagues what happened.

Mr Clinton’s secretary Betty Currie told the gate officer over the radio: "The President is still with another appointment", a message which was relayed to Miss Lewinsky.

Mr Byrne wrote: "Monica, however, still regarded herself quite favorably as the president’s singular mistress. So now she was pissed off.

"She pressed the officer about the delay and wanted to know why she was left standing in his security booth. He lashed back."

The officers supposedly became short with Miss Lewinsky and told her: ‘You have to wait. He’s with his other piece of a**. Wait till he’s finished’.

At that point Miss Lewinsky supposedly made the gesture towards her body and said: "What’s he want with her when he has this?"

In extracts of the book already made public, Mr Byrne has claimed that Mrs Clinton once gave her husband Bill a black eye during a violent row.

Mrs Clinton is said to have smashed a blue vase to pieces during the 1995 argument which left the President with a "real, live, put-a-steak-on-it black eye".

Mr Byrne says that the biggest concern for the Secret Service was not terrorism or somebody getting into the White House - it was Mrs Clinton going after her husband.

Mrs Clinton’s Presidential campaign have dismissed Mr Byrne’s book as fiction.

Miss Mondale, who was romantically linked to Arnold Schwarzenegger and Eagles drummer Don Henley, died in 2011 of brain cancer at age 51.

She had maintained she and Mr Clinton were ‘just friends’.

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368.

 

