David Cameron calls in Jeremy Clarkson to take Remain campaign’s EU referendum efforts into top gear

2016-6-16

DAVID Cameron is trying to move the Remain campaign’s efforts up a gear by bringing in Jeremy Clarkson.

With the latest poll showing Brits want Brexit and do not trust his Project Fear tactics he has turned to his friend, and former Top Gear presenter, for help.

During an informal talk with Cameron over cappuccinos in Stronger In-branded mugs and croissants,

Clarkson added: "I have not, with the greatest of respect, heard one politician say anything that's caused me to change my mind.

"There's huge numbers that don't understand and get confused. Really, it's my gut."

Clarkson has previously declared being in favour of Remain, saying it would be "better to stay in and try to make the damn thing work properly".

During their chat at the office of Clarkson’s TV production company in west London, the television presenter revealed there are only three things he and his co-host James May agree on.

He said: “It's an extraordinary thing that James and I only agree on three things, which is sandwich spread is delicious, the old Subaru Legacy Outback is a good car and Britain staying in."

Clarkson came out in favour of remaining in the EU back in March in a Sunday Times column.

He wrote: “Britain, on its own, has little influence on the world stage.

“I think we are all agreed on that.

“But Europe, if it were well run and had cohesive, well thought-out policies, would be a tremendous force for good.”

He said he believes the EU is in need of reform but it is better to be working from the inside to try and change it.

Clarkson and Cameron are friends, who live close to each other in Oxfordshire.

During the row over Clarkson's departure from Top Gear, after he punched a producer in a row over his dinner, the Prime Minister spoke to defend him.

Cameron said: "He's a constituent of mine, he's a friend of mine, he's a huge talent. I see that he said he regrets some of what happened.

"Because he is a talent and he does amuse and entertain so many people, including my children who'll be heartbroken if Top Gear is taken off air, I hope this can be sorted out because it is a great programme and he is a great talent."


Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

