The Donald accuses U.S. President of pushing the UK out of Europe by lecturing them to stay in

2016-6-24

Donald Trump has sensationally accused Barack Obama of forcing Britain out of the EU by preaching that they should stay in.

The presidential hopeful said the outgoing leader's endorsement failed because 'a lot of people don't like him'.

The U.S. President angered many voters when he flew to London in April to make his case in person.

Standing alongside David Cameron, he said UK business would take a hit and stressed that America would be in no hurry to renegotiate a free trade deal with Britain.

Speaking at the opening of his new Turnberry hotel and golf course, Mr Trump said: "I was surprised that President Obama would be so bold to come here and tell people what to do.

"I think a lot of people don't like him and I think if he had not said it I think you're result might have been different."

He added: "He got involved, I don't know if that was through a friendship with David Cameron. It could have been.

"I understand friendship and I can understand why he did it, but I think it is something that he shouldn't have done. It's not his country, it's not his part of the world.

"He shouldn't have done it and I actually think his recommendation perhaps caused it to fail."

This afternoon, the president took a softer tone about the future of the UK, insisting that the "special relationship" between the two countries was "enduring".

He said: "The United Kingdom's membership in NATO remains a vital cornerstone of U.S. foreign, security, and economic policy.

"So too is our relationship with the European Union, which has done so much to promote stability, stimulate economic growth, and foster the spread of democratic values and ideals across the continent and beyond."

The immediate aftermath of the referendum result saw turmoil on the markets, with the FTSE plunging by more than 7 per cent at one stage and later saw Mr Cameron resign.

The billionaire tycoon - who supported a Brexit - said Mr Cameron "probably did the right thing" in resigning after he backed a vote to Remain in the EU with the endorsement of Mr Obama.

He said he liked Mr Cameron, but added that the British Prime Minister 'wrong' on the EU referendum by not getting "the mood of his country right".

He said Boris Johnson, the former London mayor who led the charge for the UK to Leave the EU, will be a good replacement as "he got it right so that gives him an advantage".

Mr Trump chose the day after the referendum to open his new golf course on the west coast of Scotland and pledged to "fix" the US in the same way he refurbished the "dilapidated" Turnberry hotel.

