Nicola Sturgeon wants new independence referendum to stop Scotland ‘being taken out of the EU against our will’

2016-6-24

SCOTLAND’S First Minister threatened to blow the Union apart yesterday by warning that a second independence referendum was now “highly likely”.

Nicola Sturgeon said it was “democratically unacceptable” that Scotland faced being dragged out of the EU against its will.

The result has also sparked calls for a referendum on a united Ireland from Sinn Fein’s Gerry Adams and Martin McGuinness,

Mr McGuinness claimed the British Government had forfeited any “mandate” to represent the economic and political interests of those in the North.

And he said No10 had a “democratic imperative” to call a vote on the Republic uniting with

­­Northern Ireland — where 55.8 per cent voted to stay in the EU.

Deputy First Minister of Ulster Mr McGuinness said: “We are now in unchartered waters, nobody knows what is going to happen.

"The implications for all of us on the island of Ireland are absolutely massive.”
Speaking in Edinburgh, Ms Sturgeon said the Scottish government would now begin preparing legislation to pave the way for another independence vote.

Scotland voted in favour of the UK staying in the EU by 62 per cent to 38 per cent.

But 52 per cent of those who voted UK-wide chose to leave.

The SNP reserved the right to hold another independence poll if there was a “significant and material change” in circumstances from 2014.

Scotland will seek independence now. Cameron's legacy will be breaking up two unions. Neither needed to happen. https://t.co/4MDj7pndcq

 

 

 

 

 

Her words were welcomed by Carles Puigdemont, president of Spain’s breakaway republic Catalonia.

He said: “EU institutions must pay more attention to its citizens and its historical nations.

“If Scotland was independent it would remain in the EU.”

Harry Potter author JK Rowling added that David Cameron’s legacy would be “breaking up two unions”.

Both Ms Sturgeon and former First Minister Alex Salmond had warned a second independence vote was all but inevitable if Scotland voted to Remain.

Ms Sturgeon said she “deeply” regretted the Brexit vote.

She said: “This is not a situation that I wanted Scotland or the UK to be in today. The issues we face are complex.

“Many who voted against independence in 2014 are today reassessing their decision.

“We proved we are a modern, outward-looking, open and inclusive country, and said clearly that we do not want to leave the European Union.

“I am determined to do what it takes to make sure that these aspirations are realised.”

Experts said the Scottish Nationalist Party would now be seen by many abroad as the most “internationalist” or outward-looking in the UK.

But Scottish Lib Dems leader Willie Rennie demanded calm.

He said he was “gutted” but urged the SNP not to rush into a constitutional debate as it could cause more chaos.

 

Angus MacNeil, the SNP head of the Commons Energy Select Committee, tweeted “Scotland will probably be a British member state of the EU”.

He added the Scots would be “lobbied by England and Wales to take issues to the table”.

The Scottish Cabinet meets today before a fresh statement from Ms Sturgeon on Tuesday.

A Scottish independence referendum must be agreed by the PM and laws drawn up to place it on the statute book.

If Scotland voted for independence it would have to apply to become a new member of the EU and all other 27 EU member states would have to agree.

Scotland may also have to ditch the Pound for the euro.

Ms Sturgeon revealed she had spoken to London mayor Sadiq Khan and said they shared a “common cause” about a future relationship with the EU.

Sources said that meant that both want a seat on the negotiating table to fight to retain access to the EU single market.

An insider said: “She does not mean London remaining a member of the EU on its own. That would be impossible.”

