Jeremy Corbyn congratulates Germany on decision to invite over a MILLION refugees to Europe

2016-6-21

JEREMY CORBYN last night praised Angela Merkel for throwing open Europe’s borders to over a million refugees – and insisted Britain should take more of them.

And the Labour leader – supposedly trying to win voters over to staying in the EU – declared he was “no lover” of the European Union and Leave may win.

In an eve-of-Referendum TV debate, the Labour leader said the German Chancellor’s decision to waive border controls last summer to encourage Syrians to head to Germany last was a “humanitarian response”.

And he insisted he would be making a “very strong plea” in the coming weeks for Britain and other EU member states next month to “house more refugees”.

So far David Cameron has only agreed to take 26,000 between now and 2020.

Angela Merkel’s decision in September last year is widely seen as having fuelled the biggest humanitarian crisis in Europe since the Second World War.

But Mr Corbyn said: “I think Angela Merkel was trying to make a humanitarian response. On refugees, we have to deal with the problem at source.”

The Labour leader’s comments came in his final TV appearance of the Referendum campaign – one in which he has been slammed for his lacklustre support for the EU.

Speaking last night he said there was no way he would be to blame if the pro-EU Remain campaign lost.

But while insisting he would be voting Remain on Thursday, he blasted the EU for trying to sign a “damaging” trade deal with the US, the way it “shields tax havens”, and its “questionably legal” refugee agreement with Turkey.

David Cameron insists a free trade deal with the US -- dubbed ‘TTIP’ -- is a central reason for remaining inside the EU.

But Mr Corbyn said he was bitterly opposed as it would “the worst of working conditions and standards from the US in to the EU”.

He told the audience: “There’s every chance it will never see the light of day and that’s why we have to press very hard to oppose it.”

He added that if he ever became Prime Minister, he would take on Brussels by renationalising the railways despite EU legislation calling for more privatisation.

Mr Corbyn explained that he was backing Remain after a life of fierce Eurosceptism as he wanted to try and reform the organisation from inside.

Voters have gone to UKIP and to the SNP because they don’t see Labour as representing them anymore

Last night Jeremy Corbyn was criticised by one his closest allies for not doing enough to win back lost working class voters.

Jon Lansman -- who ran the hard-left socialist’s leadership campaign -- admitted that Labour “alienated our core voters, millions of them.

"They’ve gone to Ukip and to the SNP because they don’t see Labour as representing them anymore.”

Speaking to BBC Radio 4, he said: “What Jeremy’s got to do now is he's got to come up with a positive programme, not opposition to what the Tories are doing.”

The boss of the hard-left Momentum group claimed the Shadow Chancellor was doing a better job than the hapless Labour leader.

“It’s actually John McDonnell who is leading on that stuff, and yes I think there’s a lot already that’s come out, but there’s a lot more work to do,” he said.

Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

