The other countries who could follow Britain out of the EU after becoming disillusioned with Brussels

2016-6-24

FAR right political parties across Europe are calling for their own countries to stage referendums on leaving the EU just hours after Brits voted in favour of Brexit yesterday.

Britain's decision to get out of the EU sent shockwaves around the world - triggering a frenzy of other European nations calling for their own Frexits, Nexits, Swexits and more.

So who are the countries now calling to make their own exit from the EU?

Shortly after the result of the historic referendum was made in the early hours of this morning, Marie Le Pen, the leader of the Front National party in France, demanded a "Frexit".



Austria has a large Eurosceptic movement, as was demonstrated when Norbert Hofer, the far-Right populist candidate, came close to winning the presidency.
His party, the FPÖ, has experienced a surge in support in recent months.
This month, Austria’s new chancellor, Christian Kern, said that Brexit could mean the "slow goodbye of the European idea" unless serious reform is carried out.
He claimed that Brexit would trigger "enormous economic upheaval and a shift in the continent’s political balance".



The Czech Republic has already called for its own referendum - dubbed a Czexit - in the wake of Brexit.
Last month he told a Czech news agency: "The consequences could really be tremendous. Debates about leaving the EU could be expected if this country in a few years, too, if Britain left the EU."
Parties like the Civic Democratic Party or the Czech Communist Party could gain momentum in the aftermath of Brexit, he said, leading to a return to the "Russian sphere of influence, which is against our national interests".
Last year, a poll found that 62 per cent of Czechs would vote to leave the EU in a referendum, amid anger after Brussels forced the country to accept a number of migrants.

She was soon followed by the leader of the far right Dutch Party for Freedom Geert Wilders who called for a "Nexit" for The Netherlands.

There are now fears that the Czech Republic, Sweden and Greece may all also want out triggering a mass exodus.

In May, an Ipsos Mori poll revealed that more than half of French and Italian citizens want a referendum.



Denmark openly supported David Cameron’s attempt to renegotiate Britain’s deal with the EU and like us the country benefits from a number of exceptions from EU rules.
Denmark held a referendum last December, although with a much more limited impact: Danes decided against handing over more powers to the EU.
But that alone is not enough to predict whether Danes would really want to vote "out".
The far-Right Danish People’s Party (DPP) however has called for the country to hold a referendum of its own.
The DPP is not opposed to the EU on principle, but wants to limit its reach - preventing it from getting involved too closely with the affairs of member states.
It holds 37 seats out of 179 in its parliament, making it the second-largest party in the country.
Many Danes fear that more immigration or an influx of refugees could threaten the small nation's welfare system.

Jeppe Kofod, a Danish MEP and leader of the Social Democrats in the European Parliament, told MailOnline: "All over Europe people are worried about the crises we face such as migration and terrorism.

"Now that the UK has left, many are starting to think that this would be the solution for them."



The Economist Intelligence Unit has predicted that Greece could exit the Eurozone altogether now that the UK has voted in favour of Brexit.
The economic uncertainty produced by Britain leaving the EU has the potential to seriously knock the Greek economy as it continues to struggle under the weight of long-term structural reforms and debt repayments.
The Mediterranean country is commonly believed to be one of the most Eurosceptic countries in the EU.
But what Greece fears most is not an anti-EU referendum influenced by right-wing parties, but rather the EU pushing Greece out in order to save cohesion among the remaining members.
Today holidaymakers in Greece reported being unable to withdraw or exchange their British currency following the vote.



Many Hungarians living in Britain - of which there are almost 300,000, are already beginning to fear what Brexit will mean for them.
Earlier this month the country's government urged Brits to remain in the EU - despite that it is said to be one of the most Eurosceptic countries in the EU.
Its parliament contains a majority of anti-EU parties, including the neo-Nazi party Jobbik.
Relations between Hungary and Brussels have been strained, particularly over the migration crisis, with Hungary refusing to comply with Germany’s demands and take a quota of refugees.
Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban is not known to be a particular friend of the EU. It's believed he only encouraged Britain to stay in Europe most likely because we are an important partner for the Budapest-based government.
Orban is planning to hold a referendum in Hungary that could hurt EU cohesion. After last year's influx of refugees into the country, Hungarians will be asked to decide whether the EU should be allowed to resettle refugees despite a lack of consent by national parliaments affected by the decision.
In Hungary, it might not be a clear-cut "in or out" referendum about membership that could cause trouble but rather a referendum that is designed to indirectly question Brussels' authority.



As our closest neighbour it is perhaps inevitable that people will be questioning what the pro-Europe Republic of Ireland will be doing next.
New trade arrangements will need to be drawn up to allow Britain and Ireland to continue their close commercial cooperation.
But the foremost issue that demands consideration is the question of border controls.
The border between Ireland and Northern Ireland will likely need to be policed when Britain leaves the EU, but the extent to which this will be enforced is far from clear.
Brexit has also triggered concerns about what will happen to the peace process.



Recent polls have revealed that 48 per cent of Italians believe they would be better off out of the EU.
That figure has increased from 35 per cent over the last year, suggesting that Eurosceptic momentum is building due to the country's migration crisis, poor economy and unemployment figures.
Earlier this month, the populist Five Star movement vowed it would demand a referendum on the Euro, which would lead to a full-scale vote on EU membership.
The party is growing in popularity. Earlier this month, it won 19 out of 20 mayoral elections in the country.
As one of the core members of the EU however an Italian referendum would be extremely damaging to the union.

Italy’s anti-establishment 5-Star movement has now officially called for a referendum on whether to keep the Euro.

Buoyed by big gains in local elections, Luigi Di Maio, a vice president of the lower house of parliament, said: "We want a consultative referendum on the Euro.

"The Euro as it is today does not work. We either have alternative currencies or a 'Euro 2’."



Brexit is commonly believed to be a bad thing for Poland.
When Poland joined the EU in 2004, hundreds of thousands of its citizens went to live and work in Europe, 850,000 of them in the UK.
Now that Britain has voted to leave the EU, Poles may have to face the process of applying for work visas, and many may be rejected.
Since the outcome of the vote was announced the volatility of the financial markets has affected Poland badly. The zloty plummeted in value in its steepest dive since 2011, losing 3.8 per cent against the Euro.



Despite rising unemployment and a stalled economy Spain has not yet given rise to a Eurosceptic party.
Spain was able to join the European Community in 1975 after the death of dictator General Franco. Some have suggested that it is this sense of relief that continues to make the country pro-Europe.
At present there are more than 760,000 Britons living in Spain and the Prime Minister was careful to reassure ex-pats that they would not be deported overnight.
However many remain concerned that they will no longer enjoy the same rights as they did as EU citizens.

Experts across the continent warned today that Brexit would lead to the entire break-up of Europe.

The leader of the far-right Danish People’s Party says Denmark should now follow Britain’s lead and hold a referendum on its membership.

Party leader Kristian Thulesen Dahls said if the Danish parliament cannot agree on reforms with the EU a referendum could give Denmark a new opportunity.



Sweden has traditionally been one of Britain’s closest EU allies, often voting the same way as the UK in the European Parliament and opting to stay out of the Euro.
Hence, a Brexit would raise particular worries in Sweden. The country accepted hundreds of thousands of refugees last year but has struggled to integrate some of them.
Margot Wallstrom, Sweden’s Foreign Minister, said she was concerned that Brexit would mean the collapse of the EU.
She told the BBC: "That might affect other EU member states that will say, well, if they can leave, maybe we should also have referendums, and maybe we should also leave."
One recent poll by TNS Sifo suggested that 36 per cent of Swedes would vote to leave the EU if the UK opted for Brexit, with only 32 per cent wishing to remain.



With a Dutch general election due to be held next March some polls are calling far right politician Geert Wilders - who has already called for a Nexit - as the favourite.
Following the Brexit vote, he tweeted: "Hurrah for the Brits! Now it’s our turn. time for a Dutch referendum!"
Giving the Dutch a say on Europe is high on his agenda.
He previously said: "As quickly as possible, the Dutch people need the opportunity to have their say about Dutch membership of the EU. If I become prime minister there will be a referendum in the Netherlands… Let the Dutch people decide."
Latest polls have shown that 54 per cent of Dutch voters are in favour of a referendum on EU membership, making it likely in the next few years.

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

 

