Boris Johnson accuses Government of leaning on companies to back Remain

2016-6-21

BORIS JOHNSON today accused his own Government of threatening to punish top companies unless they backed Remain.

It came as the Brexit boss said he would apologise live on national TV if Britain plunged into a recession after voting ‘Out’ on Thursday.

Speaking on LBC, the former Mayor of London said the No10-backed Remain campaign had put chief execs under unprecedented pressure.

And he hinted the “honours system” was also being used as a way of convincing people to come on side.

In an extraordinary blast, he said: “I do not wish to be disparaging or critical of my friends in Government but it is well known that there is an operation in Downing Street.

“You will get a call from certain gentlemen and they will say ‘We want to continue to have contracts with you’ or ‘It’s very important we want to continue friendly relations’.

“There’s the honours system…there’s a bit of leaning on’.”

He praised both JCB boss Lord Bamford and inventor Sir James Dyson for their “heroism” in standing firm and backing a Brexit.

The Sun nine days ago revealed Brexit fury at No10 aide Dan Korski for raiding the Downing Street contacts back while working at Remain to try to compile a pro-EU letter from senior businessmen.

Stunned company bosses said they shocked to receive begging emails asking them to back the latest Stronger In letter and to give details about their staff.

Separately today BoJo insisted it would not be in the EU’s interest to give Britain “punishment” beatings if the nation votes ‘Out’.

And he said he would apologise to the public if the country plunges into a recession after a Brexit.

A caller to LBC asked: “If we Brexit and we go into recession, would you have the political courage, to go on TV … and say sorry, I made it wrong and I apologise?”

Boris replied: “Of course I will.”

And he added: “This is far more important than any individual political career.

“I don’t think London has anything to fear from coming out of the EU, and neither does Britain. When has our country ever gone wrong by believing in ourselves?”

