Juncker is left sweating as Remain has narrow lead but EU referendum race will go down to the wire

2016-6-23

EUROPEAN bigwig Jean-Claude Juncker faces a very nervous wait for Britain's EU referendum results as a poll of polls puts Remain ahead by two points.

Britain Elects has taken the averages from Populus, Mori, ComRes, YouGov, Opinium. TNS and Survation and its averages stand at 51% for Remain and Leave at 49%.

Jean-Claude Juncker seems to be sweating about the EU referendum result with the polls saying it is too close to call

The president of the European Commission was pictured wiping his brow during a press conference in Brussels.

If the polls are right about how close it is going to be then he'll wiping his brow a fair few times before the result is announced.

LIVE UPDATES: For all the latest on the referendum results

When the polls are broken down the Remain lead ranges from 10 points to two points but the Opinium poll puts Leave ahead by a sliver, by 51 per cent to 49 per cent.

With Populus, Mori, ComRes, YouGov, Opinium, TNS and Survation, our averages stand at: Remain: 51.0%Leave: 49.0% pic.twitter.com/C8jebJ9aAA

A Populus poll survey gives the pro-EU camp a 10-point lead over the Brexiteers.

The online survey of 4,700 people , carried out until midnight last night, shows 55 per cent of voters backing Remain compared to 45 per cent for Brexit.

Meanwhile an Ipsos MORI survey shows a slightly narrower four-point lead of 52 per cent wanting to stay in the European Union, against 48 per cent for a Brexit.

The gap suggests the result will go down to the wire with experts saying the result is simply too close to call.

The Ipsos MORI poll’s silver lining for Brexiteers is it suggests 12 per cent of people might change their minds in the final few hours before stepping into the polling booth.

This morning Nigel Farage said he hoped the wet weather in London and the south east could turn the tide in Leave’s favour.

Baiting the Remain camp, he said: “I do think we are in with a very strong chance, I do genuinely.

"But it's all about turnout and those soft Remainers staying at home."

The Ipsos MORI’s survey of 1,592 people was carried out until 9pm last night, making it the most up-to-date poll of the campaign.

The average of four polls puts Remain on 51.25 per cent and Leave on 48.75 per cent.

Opinium’s final poll put Leave ahead by a slither, by 51 per cent to 49 per cent, when the undecideds are stripped out.

YouGov’s poll for The Times showed a swing in the other direction with Remain on 51 per cent, and Leave on 49 per cent.

A poll late last night for the Mail and ITV put Remain slightly further ahead don 48 per cent to Leave’s 42 per cent but said 11 per cent of voters were still undecided.

Read the full breakdown here.

 

