We urge you to make history and win back Britain’s freedom…believe in yourself and our country’s greatness – vote LEAVE

2016-6-22

TODAY you can make history — by winning Britain’s independence from the crushing might of the Brussels machine.

We urge you to vote Leave . . . and make today our Independence Day.

For many of us it will be the first vote of our lifetimes that truly matters.

This referendum is not about parliamentary seats, so many of which are safely sewn up for one party or another.

Today, every vote counts equally.

And your decision is yours alone.

For months you have been bombarded by propaganda from both Remain and Leave.

But, with the referendum now here, we say this to Sun readers:

Cut through all the guff.

What does your gut tell you?

Is leaving the EU best for you?

For your family?

For your community?

For your country?

Our deal with Brussels will never improve, despite David Cameron’s belated claims.

The EU’s bullying ­President Jean-Claude Juncker made that plain yesterday.

So ask yourself this:

Do you trust Britain, the world’s fifth largest economy, to stand on its own two feet and thrive as it trades with the seven billion people living outside the EU?

Do you trust our elected politicians to run Britain without being overseen by the EU and its courts?

Do you trust them, if we leave and regain our sovereignty, to bring immigration down to levels Britain can cope with?

We on The Sun say YES to all three.

Scare stories will be proven wrong 

Put aside what the Prime Minister thinks is best for us.

Likewise the Beckhams, Doctor Who and James Bond.

What unites all the famous faces who have lobbied for Remain — and, in ­fairness, Leave — is that they will still be ­personally rich and secure whatever decision Britain takes.

But the nation’s working people have been told to fear for their jobs outside the EU.

To fear for their families’ financial security and prospects.

Even to fear for their safety.

Those scare stories have been shameful, cynical and baseless.

The Sun thinks they will prove 100 per cent wrong.

We believe our future will ultimately be more prosperous as a fully independent nation, trading
independently and run solely by politicians WE can all elect and kick out.

Every other democracy outside the EU holds these basic principles dear.

Why should Britain continue to surrender ours?

Why is it deemed “insular” and ­“narrow-minded” to want only what America, Canada, Australia and New Zealand have?

Ignore Remain’s well-orchestrated ­propaganda and its moral lectures.

Trust your instincts.

Believe in yourself and the greatness of Britain . . . and vote Leave today.

You will never have another chance.

