News sites in Europe react in shock as Britain votes to leave the EU, calling Brexit a ‘dirty divorce’

2016-6-24

PAPERS across the continent have reacted in shock after Britain voted to leave the EU.

This morning, Europe woke up to the news that 52 per cent of voters were behind Brexit.

In Germany, national newspaper Bild dubbed the decision a “dirty divorce” and called today a “Black Day for Europe”.

Yesterday, the site offered Britain 11 mock bribes if they decided to stay in the EU.

Among other promises, the rag swore that they would recognise Geoff Hurst’s 1966 goal against Germany in the World Cup Final.

They also said that they would reserve sun loungers for Brits on holiday with their towels.

In today’s coverage Bild focused on Cameron’s resignation and the effect that Brexit will have on the economy.

Spiegel proclaimed that Brexit is an “act of deliberate self-mutilation” by Britain.

But in France, readers of Le Figaro thought that Brexit was a good idea.

In a poll on the paper’s website, over 53,000 people voted on whether they were satisfied with the result of the referendum.

A staggering 62 per cent of readers said that they were happy that Britain had voted to leave the EU.

National paper le Monde also focussed on the fact that far right politician Marine Le Pen has used the referendum to call for a “Frexit”.

She is standing as a candidate for the 2017 presidential election in France.

Italian paper La Stampa said that there is a risk that other EU countries will also call for a referendum now.

In an analysis, the daily said: "The United Kingdom has spoken. And its voice is being heard by the whole world."

48 per cent of Italians want to leave the EU, according to a recent poll.

In Spain, La Vanguardia commentator Lluís Fox said that Brexit was a victory for “English nationalism” and “xenophobia”.

He warned that this would have a big impact in Europe.

But Xavier Vidal-Folch, a commentator for Spanish paper El País said that Europe must “keep calm and carry on”.

Nigel Farage was given prominence in Austrian paper Kronen Zeitung, who dubbed the vote “The Brexit Bomb”.

Daily paper Österreich also reported that the leader of far right political party, FPÖ, is also calling for a referendum.

The FPÖ last hit headlines when candidate Norbert Hofer almost won this year’s presidential election.

He received 35.1 per cent of the vote in the first round.

Outside of Europe, countries also reacted in shock and fear.

The front cover of the Sydney Morning Herald read: “Anarchy in the UK?”

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

