Our vital debate

2016-6-18

WE applaud everything David Cameron and Jeremy Corbyn said about Jo Cox ­yesterday and the manner in which they came together to say it.

It is entirely right, too, that the by-election caused by her death be uncontested.

Labour had an exceptional MP in Batley and Spen and deserve to be able to replace her without a fight.

The Tory and Labour leaders said Jo’s murder was an attack on our democracy and, whatever its motive, so it was.

For the sake of that democracy it is vital the referendum campaign restarts quickly and with a new emphasis on civility.

Britain must look to debate these vital issues with passion but without the bile of the last few months.

Jo was a champion of free speech who was campaigning hard for Remain and would have wanted her side to have every moment of the final week to press its case.

The nation is still in shock over the senseless loss of a wife, mother and politician with potential as a major figure in Westminster.

But we also have our most important decision in a generation to make in just five days.

With the polls as tight as they seem, the millions of voters still on the fence could determine our nation’s future.

Both sides need to win them round. The debate must go on.

 

THE attack on Leave voters by IMF head Christine Lagarde betrays a fundamental ignorance of them and our EU debate.

Put aside that her predictions about the economy and job losses are mere fortune-telling — former Bank of England governor Mervyn King says economic forecasts are a waste of time and we tend to agree.

What is more ill-judged is Ms Lagarde saying she always admired British “openness to other nationalities and cultures” and it was “hard to believe attitudes had changed in such a short space of time”.

They haven’t, Ms Lagarde.

Forget the excesses of a minority on the far right. The mainstream leaders of the Leave campaign, and their millions of supporters, simply want our elected politicians to be able to control immigration from the EU and for power to lie with them and not Brussels.

They want relief for those communities, which Ms Lagarde ignores, that have borne the brunt of Britain’s rapid and vast population increase.

And they seek only for Britain to be as independent as America, Canada, ­Australia and New Zealand — and to trade more freely with them and other big economies outside the EU.

The IMF chief believes this would somehow make our nation insular, small-minded and intolerant.

That is nonsense, a myth Remain seem happy to propagate, but the opposite of the truth.

