What will Brexit mean for migration?

2016-6-21

BREXIT would stop the automatic right of European Union citizens being able to live and work in Britain.

Instead if they want to come here they would need to apply under an Australian-style points based system where they would be judged on the skills they could bring to Britain.

Boris Johnson says this would be a balanced policy as it would put everyone across the world on an equal footing.

He says the EU policy is unfair as it discriminates against people who live outside the bloc.

As well as EU citizens not being able to simply move here to live, Britons may find it more difficult if they decide they want to live in an EU country.

It has not been announced but the EU may decide to make Britons apply for a visa, instead of just being able to settle.

Labour MP John Mann says voting to leave the EU is the best option as he believes the free movement of people continues to undermine pay and conditions in working class communities.

And he says it is not sustainable to have 300,000 new people added to the population ever year.

One of David Cameron’s key election pledges was to bring net migration to below 100,000 but last month official figures revealed it has risen to the second highest level on record.

Pro-Remain campaigner Jeremy Corbyn has admitted it will be impossible to put any limit on EU migrants if the country votes Remain.

Mr Corbyn said the very principle of a single market across Europe is the free movement of people.

The Labour leader’s confession comes as Migration Watch revealed immigration costs us £17billion a year.

Most of this £17billion is for benefits to those from outside the EU.

But Migration Watch said East European migrants cost as much as £1.5billion — given the difference between what they contribute to the economy and take out.

David Cameron has said cutting ties with Brussels was a “bad way” to slash the number of immigrants coming to Britain.

Speaking on a televised EU referendum debate he said they put a limit on the number of people coming here from outside the European Union for economic reasons.

He said his crackdown on migrant benefits – where people will have to pay into the system before they are allowed to claim – will dissuade people from coming here and will relieve the pressure on Britain.

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

 

