Police contacting MPs amid security concerns after brutal broad daylight murder of Jo Cox

2016-6-17

POLICE forces have been contacting MPs around the UK to give security advice after Jo Cox was murdered in broad daylight as she attended her constituency surgery.

They have been giving politicians information to enable them to deal with safety issues while emphasising the need for politicians to assess their own personal safety.

Police officers stand watch at the scene of Cox's murder this morning

A National Police Chiefs' Council spokeswoman said: "The advice - which has not changed but is kept under continual review - is supported by a range of security measures developed by the police to support MPs, working closely with the Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority and other partners.

"Police forces are contacting their local MPs to reiterate our advice and consider any new security concerns they may have.

"Officers will offer further guidance and advice where an MP requests it on a case by case basis depending on any specific threat or risk."

It comes after No10 said all members of parliament had been sent a reminder to review their security arrangements after mother-of-two Mrs Cox was gunned down in the street in Birstall, West Yorkshire, yesterday.

The advice from the Parliamentary authorities includes steps politicians can take to stay safe when they are "out and about" and suggests they should contact local police if they have any concerns.

It even suggests putting an end to open surgeries where constituents can just turn up without prior notice.

"We would strongly encourage all MPs away from the Parliamentary Estate to speak to their local police and inform them of their whereabouts if they have any concerns,” the advice reads according to the Mirror.

"You may want to make surgeries appointment only and only attend pre-arranged events where you are satisfied with the security in place."

It adds: "We are monitoring the situation very closely with the police and will update advice as required."

Former shadow minister Jonathan Reynolds said he would be beefing up security at his weekly surgery today.

Yet dozens of defiant MPs have refused to be cowed by the attack and have pledged to continue with their constituency surgeries.

My response to the senseless and heartbreaking murder of Jo is to do my job today. My care home visits and surgery will go ahead as planned.

Off to do a school visit now and will end my day at my advice surgery. Like Jo, I feel so lucky to represent my home and community.

#JoCoxRIP MPs must be in the community meeting constituents. British democracy is precious. I will be at my regular MP surgery this morning.

Weekly constituency surgery continues today- duty to constituents in need and democracy must prevail over senseless hatred

Police are likely to speak to all MPs in the coming days about their security arrangements, according to MP Stephen Timms who was stabbed by a constituent six years ago.

Roshonara Choudhry, 21, was jailed for 15 years for two counts of attempted murder.

The East Ham MP, who was attacked by a woman after he voted for the Iraq war, said:

"After I was attacked six years ago the police spoke to every MP around the country about this arrangement and I expect that after this terrible awful tragedy yesterday it will lead to discussions again.

"All of us will want to ensure that our constituents will be able to meet us without any difficulties and barriers and I hope it will lead to the openness of our country being able to continue."

Last night it emerged that detectives were in the process of boosting security for Mrs Cox, 41, in the months leading up to her death.

The Labour MP for Batley & Spen had complained of receiving a series of persistent of harassing messages, it has been claimed.

A Metropolitan Police spokeswoman said: "Officers received an allegation of malicious communications from Jo Cox MP, and in March 2016 arrested a man in connection with the investigation.

"The man subsequently accepted a police caution. The man who accepted the police caution is not the man in custody in West Yorkshire."

Police arrested “quiet loner” Tommy Mair at the scene yesterday afternoon. A man armed with an antique pistol is alleged to have screamed “Britain first” as he shot Mrs Cox up to three times before stabbing her.

One of the witnesses who initially claim they heard the remark has since denied it.

This morning it emerged police had arrested a man after gay MP Ben Bradshaw and his staff were bombarded with homophobic abuse.

Cops are questioning a 37-year-old man after a threatening call to the MP's Westminster office was recorded.

This morning MPs called for a review of security arrangements for politicians.

“If it is specifically connected to her role as an MP in that she was being targeted for that reason then I think that does have much wider implications,” said Labour MP Stephen Kinnock, who shared an office with Mrs Cox.

“I think we need to have a serious think about security, but also think about the kind of tone sometimes of the discussion that we are seeing, and sometimes, I think, the way some people seem to think politicians are fair game."

Labour MP Barry Sheerman agreed, telling the BBC: "We have got to look at the security of MPs now.

“Most of our constituents are wonderful, but there is a very small element that has become, I think, more aggressive.

“Most of my colleagues are much more worried and stressed than they used to be.”

Anna Turley, Labour MP for Redcar, noted the contrast between the “airport-style security” in Parliament and that in constituencies.

“There’s got to be some ground in-between that, where we know we’ve got some kind of security and if something starts to go wrong, it can be assessed,” she told the BBC.

“We have to explore this. I’ve been an MP for over a year now and the only security I’ve had is one of these personal fobs. There’s a lot more that needs to be looked at.”

The attack on Mrs Cox comes after female MPs said security was a "key concern" when they were surveyed last August.

A study for the Commons Administration Committee recorded politicians had dealt with incidents involving stalkers and people with knives and guns.

In January, the Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority (Ipsa) announced MPs were to get an ''enhanced'' security package following a wave of protests outside constituency offices and homes over the Commons vote on bombing Syria.

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368.

 

