

2016-6-23

THE marathon EU campaign is finally over - and Britain has left the European Union.

Brits had their say at the ballot box on the biggest political decision facing this country for decades.

Results confounded the pollsters who predicted a narrow Remain win.

For full coverage visit our EU Referendum page.

Follow our live blog below for all the latest updates through the night as the votes are counted:

 

It's goodnight/goodmorning from us and goodbye to the EU in an unforgettable night of drama.

We've witnessed a truly historic moment in the history of our country.

 

You have voted to set in motion Britain's departure from the European Union, Prime Minister David Cameron has announced his resignation and the world is coming to terms with the UK's trail-blazing decision.

 

Scroll down to relive the drama as it unfolded or you can follow our continuing coverage on our EU Referendum page as the shock-waves of yesterday's vote continues to reverberate across the globe.

 

Adieu.

 

 

 

Only Northern Ireland, London and Scotland plumped for Remain.

 

#EUref voting in London compared to elsewhereFind out more: https://t.co/oKWYBDL1HZ pic.twitter.com/7Tpz8EVqni

We understand that both Boris Johnson and Michael Gove will hold a press conference at 11am.

 

 

Former leader said he is "sad" to be leaving the EU.

 

 

 

 

 

Presidential hopeful made the comments as he arrived at Trump Turnberry for the reopening of a refurbished Open venue golf resort.

 

 

 

 

 

Republican says it is a "great thing" that people of the UK have "taken back their country" as he arrived at his golf resort in Scotland.

 

The UK is no longer the world's 5th largest economy. The £ has fallen so far that France has overtaken us. #EUref

 

 

I can't get my head around what's happening in Britain.I'm so sorry to the youth of Britain. I fear you've been let down today x

Historic Brexit vote send social media into meme frenzy.

Here's a few.

 

 

But let's just remind ourselves of the final spread of votes that led to Britain departing the EU.

 

 

Read more about how the rest of the world has reacted here.

Which country will be Nexit?

 

He told the press "the British people have voted to leave the EU and their will must be respected.

"I want to thank everyone who took part in the campaign on both sides of the argument.

"Let me congratulate all those people who took part in the Leave campaign for the spirited and passionate case they made.

"Across the world people are watching the choice Britain made.

"I want to reassure the Brits living in EU countries and European citizens living here there will be no immediate changes in their circumstances."

 

PM says a new Prime Minister should be in place by Conservative party conference in October.

He outlined his successes as leader, called Britain a "special" country but added "we need a new captain of this ship".

He told the press on the steps of 10 Downing Street standing next to wife Samantha.

 

 

BREAKING: this is *not* confirmation. But I understand David Cameron to announce he is resigning

The FTSE has opened down about 9 per cent.

Almost £180bn lost from  value of the UK's top companies.

 

Labour Leader Jeremy #Corbyn tells Sky News "we accept the vote and move on" #EUref

 

But he will be celebrating if AA predictions of fuel price hikes come true?

One prediction says petrol could jump 20 per cent post-EU.

Leave wins it with 17,410,742 votes, and 52% of public support.

Remain records 16,141,241 votes, and 48%

 

The Lib Dem leader is not holding back.

He blamed Jeremy Corbyn for an "abject failure" and called the Tory in-fighting "spineless".

 

BREAKING: Farage tells @GMB it was 'a mistake' for Leave campaign to pledge to give £350m a week EU cash to NHS.  Bombshell?

He also says the British people have "spoken clearly" and Government's job is to "get on with that decision".

.@timfarron on the #EUref 'Today we wake to a deeply divided country' pic.twitter.com/qRsUAVSExO

Irish government spokesman: Result has "very significant implications" for Ireland & PM Enda Kenny to make statement after special meeting

Today Jo wld have remained optimistic & focussed on what she cld do to bring our country back together around our best values #MoreInCommon

Liberal Democrat leader Tim Farron says he is devastated and angry and "we wake to a deeply divided country" #EUref

Scotland's first minister says the UK's Brexit could spark a fresh independence referendum north of the border.

Hackney North and Stoke Newington MP Diane Abbott says the result proves Euro-sceptic Jeremy Corbyn is "closer to the centre of gravity of the British public than other politicians."

Former Sweden PM Carl Bildt doesn't agree with Nigel Farage

I would classify this as a nightmare. pic.twitter.com/ZoqD4axYM9

 

We have surpassed greater challenges. It is time for unity, for calm & for rational thinking. Together & united we will continue to prosper.

 

With UK blazing an independence trail, which country will follow suit?

In the Netherland Geert Wilders has already called for his countrymen to follow Britain's example.

 

NEXIT, anyone?

Scotland will seek independence now. Cameron's legacy will be breaking up two unions. Neither needed to happen. https://t.co/4MDj7pndcq

Not sure this is going to go down well... pic.twitter.com/2x3ab18cgu

BBC's Andrew Neil says he expects David Cameron to make a 'holding statement' before 9am.

Cameron's final tweet was still optimistic.

 

Thank you everyone who voted to keep Britain stronger, safer & better off in Europe - and thousands of @StrongerIn campaigners around the UK

It's LEAVE 52% and REMAIN 48 %

 

That's with 362/382 voting zones declared

 

 

 

 

 

 

This is the Remain party bar. #EUref pic.twitter.com/fJdCIORWMG

It seems to be all over

 

It's a Brexit bloodbath and sterling plummet to its lowest level against the dollar since 1985.

 

Read our guide to our post-EU nation here.

 

West Oxfordshire is IN... just

 

Farage has jumped the gun with what he just said. This has been a very closely fought campaign and it will have a close result. Now, we need to knit our country back together

 

 

This is a victory for real people, a victory for decent people. Make June 23 go down in history as our Independence Day

 

Remain source says it looks 'very tough from  here'

 

 

Earlier today Nigel Farage predicted Remain would shave the vote. But he seems to have changed his mind

I now dare to dream that the dawn is coming up on an independent United Kingdom.

 


Sky has to issue a correction after wrongly announcing a Remain in in Ipswich.

In fact they voted OUT

Chelmsford, Braintree, Colchester, Basildon, Southen-on-Sea and Tendring all vote OUT.

Tendring, the latest Essex voting block result, particularly emphatic with a 69.5 per cent (57,447) OUT vote.

 

 

6.4 million votes counted for LEAVE

6.1 million votes counted for REMAIN

 

None of the polls had it this close

 

Is that the tightest result so far? We will check on that.

136,018 Leave

130,735 Remain

67 per cent turn out

Colchester 53.6% for Leave (51305) vs 46.4% for Remain (44414)

 

The results so far are showing this country is split absolutely down the middle on this

 

 

State of play at 3am with 100 results in. #EURefResults pic.twitter.com/UyPuAFeGCJ

Some notable recent results include Aberdeen where 63,985 people voted in favour of Remain, compared to 40,729 Brexiters.

 

An 82 per cent turnout and 75,396 votes for Remain

Elsewhere...

Westminster votes Remain

 

 

No surprises there.

Liverpool  58 per cent Remain - but poor turnout there.

Islingtib was 75/25 in favour of Remain.

 

Even in London there is huge disparity. Labour voters have decisively voted to leave the EU

Local media report some cheeky voter drew a penis in the Remain box... It's not clear if it counted

 

There was an argument over a spoiled ballot in W Dunbartonshire. Voter drew  penis in the Remain box. Who got the vote?

It's a prolific 67 per cent vote for the OUT campaign

Blackpool votes to Leave. Full results: https://t.co/4hLZofNaC7 #EURef pic.twitter.com/5DoUYGqQeo

Labour has lost it. Scotland voting strongly Remain, Labour areas in Eng/Wales going Leave - but still all SNP fault https://t.co/cN0S0PbY23

Relentless...

Barking & Dagenham votes 46,130 LEAVE

27,750 REMAIN

 

Knowsley votes 36,558 LEAVE

34,345 REMAIN

 

South Bucks: LEAVE

East Dunbartonshire: REMAIN

North Tyneside: LEAVE

North Ayrshire: REMAIN

REMAIN gets it - 75 per cent In

 

Some big REMAIN wins has changed the landscape...again

Down to $1.40 now

Lambeth votes to Remain. Full results: https://t.co/4hLZofNaC7 #EURef pic.twitter.com/ePZxowPawn

Glasgow votes to Remain. Full results: https://t.co/4hLZofNaC7 #EURef pic.twitter.com/t4hDaJEB1g

 

 

Leave: 67 per cent

Remain: 33 per cent

Cheers in the counting room

"His day has now gone" and he is now leading a "weak and unstable Government"

 

Wellingborough - LEAVE

Southend-on-Sea - LEAVE

Brentwood - LEAVE

Flintshire - LEAVE

City of London votes to Remain. Full results: https://t.co/4hLZofNaC7 #EURef pic.twitter.com/pJhbeDETti

79 % turn out...that's high

 

15/382 have declared
Remain: 10
Leave: 5

 

But LEAVE leads votes.
Remain: 394,282 (48.5%)
Leave: 418,809 (51.5%)

And that proves to be accurate

Total ballots: 98,062

REMAIN: 30,748

LEAVE: 67,251

 

Watch: Piers Corbyn says he hopes Jeremy will lead negotiations after Brexit #EUref pic.twitter.com/o0fo9ZHig9

 

Local result - North Antrim votes to Leave. Full results: https://t.co/4hLZofNaC7 #EURef pic.twitter.com/JsTi8vJlaI

Local result - Lagan Valley votes to Leave. Full results: https://t.co/4hLZofNaC7 #EURef pic.twitter.com/Axaznly7Dr

LEAVE lead by 15,872 votes so far.

 

Tweet me your pics and let me know which way you're voting: @jcoxwriter

 

Dundee votes to Remain. Full results: https://t.co/4hLZofNaC7 #EURef pic.twitter.com/zZIKdL2DL2

 

#EURef UPDATE: People in South Tyneside have voted to LEAVE the EUIN: 30,014OUT: 49,065https://t.co/9GN9TX3FGX pic.twitter.com/FsKGWjtJmc

 

 

Shetlands: 5,315 - 43 per cent OUT

6,907 - 57 per cent IN

 

West Dunbartonshire: 38 per cent OUT

62 per cent IN

 

 

 

That could be extended further in 20 minutes when Basildon is expected to record a Leave win - projected at around 70 per cent.

Just waiting for official confirmation on that.

 

61 per cent vote OUT

39 per cent vote IN

The pound has fallen off a cliff since the Sunderland result...

 

LEAVE: 266,721

REMAIN: 259,790

But early days - only 8/382 declared

 

Sensational. https://t.co/Ms37amGB85

 

 

 

Just a 56.2 per cent turn out - very surprising.

What could that mean for the Out vote?

 

54.7 per cent out (61,745)

45.3 per cent in (51,220)

 

 

It's a small count.

621 Leave / 803 Remain

Former Labour leader is talking to BBC.

 

Lot's of people feel this is an unequal country, a divided country. I agree with them but don't think they should vote leave in this referendum.

 

In Sunderland both sides say people who've not voted since Thatcher voted today in protest against establishment, Tories & Brussels #EUref

 

Former Lib Dem leader Paddy Ashdown has told the BBC he predicts a big swing in favour of Brexit when postal votes are counted.

 

Hartlepool yet to declare but, according the BBC, could register a 70 per cent LEAVE vote - much stronger than predicted.

A counter in Scotland has been EVICTED for being DRUNK

Highland authority Counting Agent escorted from the building for... drinking too much.

That Sunderland result is causing chaos in the fiscal market.

The value of the pound saw a dramatic fall following #Sunderland's vote to leave the #EU https://t.co/II1oB6Vob8 pic.twitter.com/1wsmr5eMdz

Remain 57.8%, Leave 42.2%

Huge win in Sunderland confounds pollsters.

Remain tallied 51,930, Leave 82,394, with a 65 per cent turnout.

Huge cheer and celebrations in the sports hall following the announcement.

The result from Newcastle shows a narrow victory for Remain - with less than two thousand votes in it.

Remain won with 65,504 votes, with Leave on 63,598.

Tory MP Neil Carmichael said he believed the Remain campaign has sneaked it.

And speaking to The Sun he endorsed the PM's leadership saying: "David Cameron was bold enough to promise a referendum, he delivered a referendum, and by all accounts he has probably won that referendum and I think that is an endorsement of his leadership and it's a great thing we're in this position."

Nigel Farage has given a statement at the Leave campaign party in central London, where he has refused to concede defeat, as it seemed he did earlier.

The Ukip boss gave a defiant statement, saying: "The eurosceptic genie is out of the battle and it now will not be put back in."

He added: "Whatever happens in the battle tonight, we are winning this war.

"We will win this war, we will get our country back, we will get our independence back and we will get our borders back."

Hardly a surprise...

The total results are 19,322 votes to Remain, a whopping 95.9%. Leave gets just 823 votes, 4.1% of the electorate on the Rock.

Suggestions that Sunderland is ranging from 54-60% for Leave.

It looks like Leave is leading in Sunderland, the first place expected to declare.

Shouldn't be too long to wait now for the official result.

More from our Deputy Political Editor Steve Hawkes on Nigel Farage:

Nigel Farage has accused the Government of abusing its power to skew the result tonight.

He said it appeared Remain had won because of the extra two million people it had managed to sign up – including half a million during the controversial 48 hour voter registration extension.

The Ukip leader told the Sun: “The whole Government machine was used to sign students up en masse, every time when you even applied for tax disc you were urged to sign. I know the way these things work.

“I fear that has tipped the balance.”

He said: “My view is the sizeable number of registrations that took place in the 48 hour extension has played a part.

“They got a huge number of young people. That’s going to make a difference.

“The whole Government campaign has been about registering young people and that’s made a big, big difference.”

Despite seeming to concede the referendum to the Remain camp as polls closed an hour ago, he is apparently now not willing to accept defeat.

Nigel Farage hasn't conceded - he just fears Remain has narrowly won. "I'll be thrilled if I'm wrong." he says

Our Deputy Political Editor Steve Hawkes says the Ukip leader simply fears his side have lost.

He adds that the Government's "huge voter registration drive" has "tipped the balance" in their favour.

Nigel Farage blames Govt's huge voter registration drive and that 48 hour extension for Remain's likely win - "That has tipped balance"

Tomorrow's front page: Brits go Referendum mad with over 30 million voting pic.twitter.com/Gud3HQbTpj

Our front page leads on the voting chaos amid the flooding across the country.

The polls have now closed, democracy has been served + we await the verdict of the people. Thanks to everyone involved + everyone who voted

The Vote Leave heavyweight tweeted to say: "Thanks to everyone involved and everyone who voted."

David Cameron posted on his Facebook page: "Thank you everyone who voted to keep Britain stronger, safer and better off in Europe - and to the thousands of Remain campaigners around the UK."

I'm at #BrexitParty reporting for @PA. Nigel Farage expected here within the hour. pic.twitter.com/jNeFiZznmz

Both sides have arranged for parties to celebrate in the event of a victory for their side.

But as reporter Ryan Hooper has highlighted, the Brexit party seems to be exclusively serving foreign beer.

Nigel Farage, who is due to arrive soon, will surely be annoyed there is no British ale available.

Paddy Ashdown famously said he would eat his hat if the General Election exit poll last year - which predicted his Lib Dem party would be decimated - was correct.

But he said his fedora is safe from consumption this time if the EU referendum exit poll predicting Remain is correct.

With a proud record of being first to declare a result in every General Election, eager volunteers are counting the ballots in Sunderland in a rush to be number one.

We expect them to deliver a result sometime around 11.30pm, one of almost 400 counting centres.

A snap exit poll by YouGov for Sky News reveals the UK is heading for a narrow Remain win with a 52% to 48% lead over Leave.

But counting could go on for 12 hours if the polls are close so here's our guide to how the night could pan out.

That's it, the polls have closed. It's now a waiting game for the results.

Stick with us through the night to find out if Britain has voted to Leave or Remain in the EU.

But one person who thinks it might be all over is Nigel Farage - who has already seemingly admitted defeat.

The Ukip boss told Sky News "looks like Remain will edge it".

Journalists waiting for Boris Johnson outside his polling station had a long wait but he did manage to get there in time.

His vote comes after he had a long day in Scotland at his daughter's graduation.

As the leading Brexiteer in the Vote Leave campaign there are no prizes for guessing which way he voted.

 

 

With polls set to close in just over 30 minutes bookmakers say they have seen a flurry of late activity.

Betfair estimates it had taken stakes worth £56million.

After spending the day at his daughter's graduation at St Andrew's University, Boris Johnson is now believed to be on his way to his polling station to cast his vote.

Press awaiting @BorisJohnson being asked to step back. Apparently we are in the way... But the officers aren't. pic.twitter.com/Dz0TULuCmL

Hours after Brexit-backers urged voters to take a pen to the polls the hashtag is still very popular on Twitter.

But now instead of just pens, people have started to get a lot more imaginative about ways voters can have their say in the EU referendum and future elections.

Bought a tin of paint and a paintbrush to the polling station today just to be sure. MI5 didn't see it coming. Don't #usepens, #usepaint

#usepens Just voted. Dribbled coffee onto ballot paper in shape of a cross. My vote is safe! Let 'em try and rub that out. #sockittotheman

2020 General Election. People scratch their vote on a strip of bark, nail it to a pigeon & hurl it in the direction of Westminster. #Usepens

Why not burn your vote on your front garden  #usepens

If you haven't voted yet you might want to go to your polling station sooner rather than later to avoid any possible last minute queues.

It's been soggy for many voters throughout the day but turnout has said to have been high,  with Betfair suggesting a 72 to 73% turnout.

This link from the Electoral Commission is a handy guide if you have never voted before, or just need a reminder.

Boris Johnson could not resist one last push for the EU referendum at his daughter’s university graduation today.

While waiting to watch his eldest child Lara Johnson-Wheeler graduate he unfurled a “last chance to vote” poster at the ceremony, at St Andrews in Scotland.

Campaigning on the referendum day is against strict voting regulations but he might get away with it.

This is because, as one witness said, he was not telling people to vote for a particular side.

The witness told Daily Record: “It was all done very much tongue in cheek. Both posters got a huge cheer and round of applause.

“Boris wasn’t telling people who to vote for, just for them to get out there and make the effort.”

Former mayor of London Boris Johnson has spent the day at his daughter Lara's graduation from St Andrews University.

But he is now at Edinburgh Airport doing what he does best - posing for selfies - so should be back in London in time before the polls close at 10pm.

Asked if he was feeling confident ahead of the result as he waited to board a flight to London at Edinburgh Airport, Mr Johnson said: "I think the polls have been very close.

"From what I have heard and all the information is that turnout is good in areas where we need it to be."

Asked if poor weather could affect turnout in key parts of the country, he added: "l don't think that will make any difference in the long run.

"It's a long time to go until the polls close."

Boris Johnson has time at Edinburgh Airport to pose for selfies after going to his daughter's graduation at St Andrews University

 

Brits enjoying themselves in Malaga are pictured reading The Sun in the sun.

There's no such luck in most of Britain though with heavy showers in the south-east and north-west, and showers in western Scotland and Northern Ireland.

The closest people have got to Spain-type weather (also known as summer) today is in the western side of Britain, in cities like Manchester and Cardiff.

Financial markets have been jittery ahead of today's vote but they are now recovering as traders are putting their money on Britain to remain in the EU.

The pound hit a new high for 2016 and the FTSE 100 share index rallied strongly.

"Overnight polls still suggest the result could be very close, although a late tilt towards Remain has helped bolster bullish sentiment on the hope the status quo is maintained and an uncertain outlook will not prevail," said Mike van Dulken and Augustin Eden at Accendo Markets.

 

People stuck in Europe because of the air controllers strike look like they won't be allowed an emergency proxy to vote.

Well I wanted 2 #leave Europe 2day but the French Air Traffic strike has forced me 2 #remain so I can't vote now but at least the sun is out

So I'm stranded in Italy due to French air traffic control strikes&unable to vote.Apparently others in same position

Electoral services won't allow as reason for emergency proxy though which seems pretty unfair. Any suggestions?

@ElectoralCommUK stuck in Barcelona due to French air traffic control strike, I need to vote

Police were called to a polling station because a woman was lending her PEN to other voters.

In the video clip, which has been uploaded to Twitter, Jacqueline Jackson explains to a PCSO she has no idea how the people she lent the pen to voted.

But the officer is still seen to be taking details from the woman who describes herself as 100% Ukip.

Of the 41,000 polling stations around the country, not all of them are church halls, libraries and schools.

Noises from Glastonbury are that many of the young 175,000 revellers plan on voting at this year's festival.

Sadly for them there are no polling stations anywhere on the campsite.

Read the full story here.

Election analyst Mike Smithson has compiled a list of polls for the last two weeks:

The final final polling table - the numbers against which the pollsters will be judged pic.twitter.com/0wyCVgo4Qy

The table shows a worrying swing to Remain for the Brexiteers.

Bookmakers' odds on Brexit have plummeted over the morning as two polls showed Remain edging ahead.

Betfair says there have been a flurry of bets on Britain staying in the EU, with the bookmaker taking £5million so far today in EU bets.

The biggest bet of the day has been a £28,500 punt on Remain.

Has the former mayor of London had a change of heart? Is he still mulling over the decision?

Er, no. Boris hasn't had his polling station picture yet because he's up in St Andrews at his daughter Lara's graduation ceremony.

Trying to tap into the millennial market former PM Tony Blair tweeted this:

I believe voting to Remain will secure Britain’s place as a proud, influential country with a strong economy. TB pic.twitter.com/q6rIJI8JIx

Predictably when you hold up a piece of easily photoshopped card, the message got lost along the way...

Tony Blair has some advice for politicians who are thinking of holding up pieces of white card with writing on them pic.twitter.com/AXYZMfkLHo

I actually think this is really out of order. pic.twitter.com/o1X7RRq5qV

And ultimately it pushed some people towards the Brexit door:

LEAVE's last ditch appeal https://t.co/POpqhKN4qY

Carried out until midnight last night, this really is the last poll.

The online survey by Populus of 4,700 people gives Remain a 10-point lead with 55% of the vote compared to Leave's 45%.

Earlier today Ipsos MORI released a poll suggesting the pro-EU camp had built up a four-point lead.

In case you don't know what an exit poll is, it's pretty simple: Ask voters coming out of polling stations how they voted and compare the results to last time's to work out a national swing.

This is normally a pretty good indicator of how the result is going to pan out.

But for the EU referendum there are NO exit polls, meaning you'll have to stay up all night with us.

Why put us through this torture, you ask?

Because there has never been a referendum on Britain's membership of the EU there is nothing to compare it to.

Load up on coffee folks.

The Ukip leader has cast his vote and has hit the pub - but only for a coffee. Drinking before midday is a bit strong even for the pint-guzzling Kipper.

Speaking outside his polling station in Kent, he'd "waited all my adult life" for this moment and he'd have "crawled uphill over broken glass to cast a vote".

"I was 11 the last time we had a referendum on this subject so, yeah, I'm pretty excited," he told reporters outside.

We've had our first reports of problems at voting stations. Chessington has had to be closed and moved to the nearby Hook Centre after the hall flooded:

Kingston Council also shut a polling station at the Shiraz Mirza community hall in Malden Manor, telling voters to instead head to the Lawrence Avenue Children's Centre.

Dozens of voters have been also been turned away at a polling station in Leighton Buzzard.

Reports suggest the voters were not included on the registration list.

Angry locals hassled MPs outside Linslade polling station for the "total shambles", and Central Beds Council eventually made arrangements for voters who'd missed out.

The final poll has Remain taking a four-point lead over Leave.

It gives the chance of Brits voting for a Brexit a 1/4 chance.

Despite reports from across the country of queues snaking out of polling station doors it's nigh-on impossible to guess the level of interest in the EU referendum.

Despite downpours in London, many voters appear to have braved the wet weather:

never seen queues before at this polling station pic.twitter.com/vmnsWlpuLJ

Here's queue in Battersea as people go to vote #euref #DemocracyInAction. One guy forgot his brolly and is soaked pic.twitter.com/Qfqre6EGBq

Queues like I've never seen out the polling station in hackney pic.twitter.com/oDUBM7wBVj

I've never see such queues at my polling station as today! Swell them folks! Swell them!

But as one politics professor warns:

1. Turnout said to be very low. Or very high. Often simultaneously.

Edinburgh council has reported 82% of its postal voters returned their ballot paper by Wednesday evening. That compares to the 86% average for postal vote returns at the general election - if that means anything...

The pound hit its highest level of the year late last night as traders bet on Britain voting Remain.

Sterling hit 1.48 US dollars, building on its rise all through the week after opinion poll data showed a narrow lead for the Remain camp. It has since eased to 1.47 US dollars.

However, experts believe that it is bookmakers' odds that currency traders are following.

The pound has now surged by 4% over the past seven days, helping it reclaim all its losses seen since the start of the year. On Monday, sterling notched up its biggest one-day gain against the dollar for nearly eight years.

Currency analysts expect volatility whichever way the vote goes.

Fed up with all the analysis already? Well don't worry #dogsatpollingstations is back this morning after a strong showing at the general election and local elections,.

It's happening again #DogsAtPollingStations pic.twitter.com/r7WZVGLx6E

It's back - #dogsatpollingstations - @Heisy_Pug says "don't forget to vote" if he could talk. pic.twitter.com/HhxPOA2SBI

We could go on, but we won't...

 

So Jeremy Corbyn's half-hearted campaign comes to an end with a reluctant vote for Remain - or so he's told us.

Asked if he was feeing confident the Labour leader smiled and said: "Extremely, it's a very good day."

On the outcome of the referendum he joked: "You could either check the wind or check the bookies," adding, "the bookies usually get it right".

I've just voted to Remain. The EU provides the best framework to meet the challenges of our time #LabourInForBritain pic.twitter.com/tzhvyBbLsY

Prime Minister David Cameron and his wife Samantha have cast their votes this morning at their local polling station Central Methodist Hall near Downing Street - unlikely to be the busiest count of the day

Ignoring questions from reporters about the weather, he issued one last plea on social media to voters to choose a "brighter future":

Vote Remain - so that our children and grandchildren have a brighter future.

He'll head back to No10 now to prepare two speeches...

But what's in store for Dave if we vote Leave?

Paranoid Leave supporters are urging voters to take a pen with them to the ballot box to stop their vote being rubbed out.

Around 46% of Brexiteers believe today's vote could be rigged, according to a YouGov poll.

One of the dastardly ruses they fear is their pencil votes being rubbed out by those suspicious looking officials at polling stations...

The Ukip leader look happy as Larry this morning despite pulling out of last night's final EU debate for "family reasons".

It later emerged he was just having dinner with his son who he hadn't seen for nine months.

This morning he posed for the cameras holding up his copy of The Sun.

Like him or loathe him, Nigel Farage is in part responsible for the EU referendum taking place in the first place.

Well with 41,000 polling stations across the country open until 10pm don't expect a quick count.

Some poor counting officers had to set off yesterday to reach the farthest flung corners of the UK.

Charles Repkke had to board a ferry last night to reach the 122 voters on the Isle of Gigha.

All the votes will be collected and taken to 382 local counting centres who will declare the results as the night goes on.

Sunderland is expected to be first with its result at 12.30am while sleepy Arun and Waveney will finally be finished at 7am.

Strap in for a long night. Read our full guide here.

German newspaper the Bild pleads with voters to choose Remain, saying they'll finally admit Geoff Hurst's goal did cross the line.

If Britain stays, @BILD will acknowledge the Wembley goal #EUref #Tomorrowspaperstoday @suttonnick pic.twitter.com/DPxHo0IbK9

The Met Office issues weather warnings overnight, with flashfloods predicted across London and the south east. The capital is expected to see a month's rainfall in the space of a few hours.

Will the torrential downpours affect voter turnout as polling stations opened across the country this morning at 7am.

Brexiteers will be hoping it does. A lower turnout is expected to favour them with more of their supporters intent on voting.

 

One polling station in Chessington appeared to flooded this morning:

I just had to be carried into a flooded polling station. It's something biblical... #remain pic.twitter.com/T8qeGC3zEd

Weather in the rest of the UK is expected to be fine.

The average of four polls puts Remain on 51.25% and Leave on 48.75%.

Opinium’s final poll put Leave ahead by a slither, by 51% to 49%, when the undecideds are stripped out.

YouGov's poll for The Times showed a swing in the other direction with Remain on 51%, and Leave on 49%.

A poll late last night for the Mail and ITV put Remain slightly further ahead don 48% to Leave's 42% but said 11% of voters were still undecided.

Read the full breakdown here.

 

