Twitter pokes fun at people predicting Brexit is bad news for Britain

2016-6-24

BRITAIN’S historic vote to leave the European Union has already become the subject of light hearted memes.

Just hours after it was announced Twitter users began to joke about the Out decision which stunned the world.

Users joked that the first images out of Britain following the decision to quit the EU showed post-apocalyptic scenes with Westminster on fire and Big Ben falling down.

Some of those who backed Remain used famous faces to describe their horror at the result.

The shocked face of Sex and the City’s Sarah Jessica Parker and the sad face of Dr Who were two of those doing the rounds this morning.

One particularly inventive social media user mocked up those who had backed Leave – including Nigel Farage and Boris Johnson – as the stars of ‘Straight Outta Europe’.

The meme referred to the hit film Straight Outta Compton about  rappers Dr Dre, Ice Cube and Eazy-E.

Other memes showed scenes from The Lord of the Rings and SpongeBob SquarePants as a city burned behind him.

Pictures of people crying and a burning Union Jack flag were said to sum up the mood of those who had backed Remain.

At just after 6am this morning Leave passed the threshold of 16.8million votes needed to trigger a Brexit.

Following that news David Cameron announced he would be resigning as Prime Minister.

The Tory leader said he would be leaving No10 in an emotional statement outside Downing Street.

He said: “I do not think it would be right for me to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination.”

Flanked by wife Samantha, the PM said he had informed the Queen of his decision to remain in place for the short term.

"The British people have voted to leave the European Union and their will must be respected," said Mr Cameron.

"The will of the British people is an instruction that must be delivered."

The decision to Leave has triggered a market meltdown with  more than £100billion was wiped off the London FTSE 100 this morning.

The decision dominated social media with David Cameron, the EU and Nigel Farage all the most talked about subjects on Twitter.

Ukip leader Nigel Farage has hailed the vote a 'victory for real people' and declared June 23 the country's 'Independence Day'.

But the ultra-narrow margin of victory of 52 per cent to 48 per cent left the nation split down the middle.

Huge swathes of northern England, the East coast, the Midlands and Wales, plus rural areas across the south, all backed Out.

The final result saw 17,759,184 Brits vote to leave, while 16,580,508 backed remain.

More than 30 million Brits voted yesterday in a massive turnout of 72% after the EU debate set the nation alight.

It was the highest turnout in a nationwide vote in 24 years since the 1992 general election.

