David Cameron’s desperate plea to voters to back Remain for a ‘stronger, safer, better off’ Britain

2016-6-22

DAVID Cameron issued a final passionate plea to voters to back Remain for a “stronger, safer, better off” Britain.

The pumped-up PM said the pro-EU campaign had just hours to “hammer out” the message on doorsteps across the country as the EU referendum goes down to the wire.

Speaking at a campaign visit in Bristol, the PM put jobs and the economy at the top of the agenda and said the UK would “diminish” if it left the EU.

Dressed down in a jumper with no tie, he told gathered supporters: “We have got one day left to hammer out that message: stronger, safer, better off.

“And as we do so think of one word which brings it all into one which is ‘together’ because frankly if we want a bigger economy, more jobs we’re better if we do it together.

“If we want to fight climate change we’re better if we do it together.

“If we want to win against the terrorists and keep our country safe it’s better if we do it together so please give it everything you’ve got in these last hours to make sure that people go out and vote tomorrow, go out and vote Remain.

“Go out and vote Remain for a bigger, better Britain inside a reformed European Union. Stronger, safer, better off . A day to go, let’s do it.”

Mr Cameron appeared alongside former PM Sir John Major who accused Leave campaigners of being the "grave-diggers of our prosperity" who will have to answer for their claims during the campaign.

He rubbished claims that leaving the EU would be a silver bullet for large-scale immigration, saying it would be a “disproportionate” response to the crisis.

In a clear swipe at Boris Johnson and Michael Gove, the former Tory leader said: "If our nation does vote to leave, we must respect their decision, but if they vote to leave on the basis of half-truths and untruths and misunderstandings, then pretty soon the grave-diggers of our prosperity will have some very serious questions to answer.

"They will have to account for what they have said and done but that will be of little consolation for we will be out, out for good, diminished as an influence on the world.

“A truly Great Britain shrunk down to a little England perhaps without Scotland, perhaps with a grumpy Wales, and certainly with a Northern Ireland divided from the south by the border the controls that would then be the edge of the European Union."

