Polling stations open across the country for the EU referendum….and it’s a soggy ordeal for millions

2016-6-23

AFTER months of talks the polls have finally opened and Brits can have their say on whether to stay in the EU or cut ties with Brussels.

More than 46 million people are registered to vote today in a referendum which most experts say is now just too close to call.

But torrential rain and flooding caused chaos across London and the south of England overnight and many found just getting to their local polling station a tricky challenge.

At least three polling stations were closed due to the shocking weather.

BBC polling guru Professor John Curtice said the weather was unlikely to affect the outcome of the referendum.

When asked, he said: "Very, very rarely. There have been occasions in British elections where one part of the country has had the usual British rain and another has had a glimmer of sunshine and it’s had no perceptible impact on the level of turnout.

"So unless those thunderstorms are actually disruptive and make it difficult for people to actually get to the polling station it’s unlikely to make much difference."

Actually I do think we are in with a very strong chance, I do genuinely. But it's all about turnout and those soft Remainers staying at home

The Leave camp has a "very strong chance" of pulling off one of the biggest political upheavals of recent times, Ukip leader Nigel Farage insisted.

And he poked fun at his opponents saying the weather would stop them going out.

Speaking outside his Kent home, Mr Farage said: "Actually I do think we are in with a very strong chance, I do genuinely.

"But it's all about turnout and those soft Remainers staying at home."

Prime Minister David Cameron ignored questions about the weather, saying only "Good morning" to the gathered media from across the world, as he and wife Samantha cast their votes at Methodist Hall in Westminster.

With turnout seen as key to a result that polls place as too close to call, unseasonal downpours across London and the South East could impact on voter levels as bad weather tends to have a negative influence on the number of people who cast their ballots.

While a source for the Remain campaign added: "This is the biggest decision our country will take for a generation but one of the few things not on the ballot paper is the British weather."

Experts are split on the impact weather has on turnout in elections.

Heavy showers are forecast to spread more widely during the afternoon and evening - when many workers traditionally head to the polling stations.

During early evening heavy rain will have reached central England with the region also facing vigorous thunderstorms.

Opinium Research recorded a tiny lead for Brexit in its final survey of 3,000 voters this week as it found 45 per cent backed Leave and 44 per cent backed Remain.


But after taking into account the margin of error in the study, the firm declared it impossible to predict a winner.

The poll ties in with the mixed results found by all of the polling firms in the last week of the race, with some results showing small leads for either side while others showed a tie.

By contrast, betting markets have continued to show Remain as the strong favourite as the race enters its final hours.

Adam Drummond, of Opinium Research said: "This really is  'too close to call' territory with undecided voters holding the balance of the vote in their hands.

"Although referendum campaigns normally see a move back to the status quo as we get closer to polling day, this hasn't yet shown up in our polls and the Remain camp will have to hope that it happens in the polling booth itself if Britain is to stay in the European Union."

Voters have been turned away from casting their ballots because of a mix-up at a polling station.

Several people in Leighton Buzzard turned up with their polling cards but were told their names were not on the electoral list.

Central Bedfordshire Council is said to have moved quickly to rectify the error, but at least one voter is feared to have been effectively disenfranchised because he had to travel up to Manchester and cannot make it back before polls close at 10pm.

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

 

