UK holidaymakers in Greece are refused cash exchange or withdrawal after Brexit

2016-6-24

BRITS on holiday in Greece have been unable to withdraw cash today - with hotels and banks refusing to exchange it after the Pound plunged following yesterday's historic vote for the UK to leave the EU.

Holidaymakers on the island of Kos told how this morning they have been told they can't exchange currency because there is no official exchange rate from the European Central Bank.

we're in Greece - no cash exchange or cash machine withdrawals for Brits. #brexitfail pic.twitter.com/BzJq7lJvAZ

One Brit on holiday in Kos, Matt Rooney, tweeted: "It's beginning already! We're in Greece, no cash exchange & no cash machine withdrawals for Brits. Great #brexitfail"

In his tweet, sent at around 8.30am today, Mr Rooney, who describes himself as a developer of leaders, teachers and schools, posted a picture of a sign at the Blue Lagoon Resort where he is staying.

It read: "Dear guests, we would like to inform you that we cannot exchange British or Scottish Pounds at the moment, as we do not have an official exchange rate from the central bank. Thank you for your understanding!"

Since his original tweet Mr Rooney, who lives in Nottinghamshire, has said some cash machines are now working, but some hotels are still unwilling to exchange currency.

He wrote: "Am told cash machines now firing on all cylinders, but still no sterling cash exchange at the hotel."

According to the account the Daily Monitor, the same situation is happening in Uganda.

It said: "UG FOREX: Bureaus are not buying the pound b'se it's extremely unstable, Euro drops - @NellyKapo reports #Brexit"

In the early hours the pound plummeted to its lowest level against the dollar since 2009 at $1.34 wiping around 10 per cent off the value of the currency after a rollercoaster night for sterling.

More than £100billion was wiped off the London FTSE 100 this morning within minutes and the value of the pound crumbled as world markets were gripped by Brexit panic.

This afternoon spokesman for the Blue Lagoon Resort said: "Following yesterdays' UK Referendum the Greek National Bank delayed its announcement of today's currency exchange rate between the UK pound and the euro.

"As a result, we posted the attached notice in order to avoid any inconvenience to our guests.

"An hour after this, we received from the Bank the exchange rate and normal operations resumed."

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

 

