Boris Johnson urges voters to back Brexit and change course of history – or risk waking up disappointed and ‘hungover’ if we Remain

2016-6-20

BORIS Johnson is warning Brits not to wake up to the “hangover” of Britain voting to Remain in the EU and urging them to seize the opportunity to "change the course of history".

The former London Mayor is making his final push for a Brexit this week with the polls finely balanced just days before the referendum.

Speaking at a truck factory in Ipswich this morning Mr Johnson said the Remain camp were "offering nothing but the steady and miserable erosion of Parliamentary democracy".

It comes after David Cameron faced tough questions on immigration in last night's special episode of Question Time.

The Prime Minister was compared to Neville Chamberlain after admitting how hard he had found it to cut net migration - which is at record levels.

The referendum campaign will pause today as MPs gather in Westminster to pay tribute to their murdered colleague Jo Cox, with Parliament re-called in the wake of her killing.

But later hostilities will resume, with Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn appearing on Sky News in a special EU show.

And a final push will begin tomorrow night when Boris Johnson takes part in the biggest live TV debate of the campaign at Wembley Arena.

A number of polls over the weekend saw the crucial contest almost neck and neck, with Remain picking up several points after slumping recently.

Speaking in central London last night BoJo warned that a Remain vote would be a green light for the EU to carry on “unchastened unbound, unaccountable, undemocratic and profoundly unreformed.”

Appearing alongside fellow Brexiteer Michael Gove at at the Leave campaign’s re-launch event, he asked voters if they really wanted to see hated Eurocrat Jean-Claude Juncker popping open the bubbly on Friday.

He said: “Cast your minds forward to very early on Friday morning, and you’re slowly coming to consciousness with the sense of the mildly — perhaps seriously — hungover.

“And you look around and can see half drunk cans of beer and scrunched up crisp packets and the television still burbling faintly in the corner of the room.

“And you have a terrible sense that something momentous has happened in the eyes of of country and the whole European Union.

“And you try to remember what it is and then it hits you with a terrible sense of shock and disappointment — that Remain have narrowly won.

“Imagine that, and the cameras are going to Brussels where Jean Claude Juncker is celebrating with what looks suspiciously like champagne.

“And you realise with a terrible sense of disappointment that our nation came centre stage of a battle and we missed a fantastic opportunity for change and improvement in this country.”

Mr Gove said leaving the EU will not just be a “vote of confidence” for Britain but will show solidarity with those in struggling economies such as Greece and Spain who have suffered because of the EU.

Former No 10 adviser Steve Hilton said Brussels was “probably one of the most corrupt places on the planet.”

He said: “The people who lead the European Union have never said sorry, never apologised, never admitted that they’ve got anything wrong."

The pair were joined at Old Billingsgate Market in central London by former No10 policy guru Steve Hilton who called Brussels “one of the most corrupt places on the planet”.

The London rally was the official event organised the by the Leave camp after campaigning was suspended on Thursday following the death of Jo Cox.

Yesterday morning Michael Gove gave a touching tribute to the slain Labour MP, telling the BBC she was the sort of person we would “want our daughters to grow up to be”.

Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368.

