David Cameron makes last minute plea to older voters to get them to choose Remain in the EU referendum

2016-6-21

DAVID Cameron used No10’s steps today to issue a sombre plea to wavering older voters to stay in the EU for their children’s sake.

In a live address timed for lunchtime TV news bulletins, the PM said he wanted to talk to undecideds aged over 50 “directly, and personally”.

But the move angered some Brexit campaigners, who accused the Tory leader of abusing the trappings of power to make the partisan message.

The row came as both camps prepared to unleash a final frantic final day of campaigning today ahead of Thursday’s landmark poll.

Urging older voters to shelve their own personal views, Mr Cameron said: “Think about the hopes and dreams of your children and grandchildren, our economic security is paramount.

“Remember, they can’t undo the decision we take.

“The next generation will have to live with the consequences far longer than the rest of us.”

He added: “For you, for your family, for the future of our country, vote Remain”.

The PM then left Downing Street late this afternoon for a final 24 hour-long bus tour around Britain in a bid to win over four million voters yet to make up their minds.

But it emerged Labour boss Jeremy Corbyn blocked a plan by No10 for the two party leaders’ tour buses to meet up to demonstrate unity.

At the same time, Leave campaign boss Boris Johnson will also begin a frantic helicopter tour of the country at dawn today to whip up passions for a Brexit vote.

And fellow Brexit chief Michael Gove will blitz the south west in Vote Leave’s battle bus.

Mr Cameron’s former No10 strategy boss Steve Hilton branded his No10 stunt “really weird.”

Vote Leave campaigner Mr Hilton added: “They have lost the argument on immigration, so he has been wheeled out by rather panicky spin doctors to try to change the subject”.

Tory Brexit MP Bernard Jenkin said the statement was “not within the spirit of purdah”.

But Justice Secretary Mr Gove said he was “chilled” about PM’s Downing St address, adding: “The PM has a right to make the arguments he wants to make”.

