Rage of the working class

2016-6-24

THE people have spoken. We have woken up to a new Britain.

It is a momentous turning-point in our history.

For the first time in 43 years our nation will stand on its own feet, free from the European Union.

What David Cameron experienced yesterday was an explosion of anger from millions of working class people who cannot now be ignored.

Some was directed at the EU he campaigned with such cynicism to stay in.

More it was a howl of rage at the increasing hopelessness of their lives, their neglected communities and the gulf between them and the rich, ­powerful governing class which this Referendum has so starkly exposed.

Our population has just rocketed by 513,273 in one year, 335,600 from migration. It is not racist to protest at the calamitous effect this is having on working people who bear the brunt of it.

Prosperous middle class home owners in London love all the Polish plumbers and cleaners. For working people the influx has meant low pay, stagnant for a decade as housing costs have soared. It means schools and surgeries are full up.

It means being branded “thick” by ­supposedly educated Remain supporters too dim themselves to see that the rational desire for our Government to control immigration has nothing — zero — to do with prejudice or narrow-mindedness.

Liberals champion all disadvantaged people EXCEPT poor Brits. For them, they cannot hide their contempt.

Who, then, has spoken for these ­communities? A handful of Labour and Tory MPs. The rest put aside their apparently minor differences, linked arms for Remain and treated Brexit voters like filth on their shoes.

For Labour this looks terminal.

It is now a party of metropolitan posers feigning concern about the poor yet without the slightest desire to get their hands dirty doing anything for them.

The Tories vowed to be the workers’ party. Instead most lobbied to stay in the EU, pretending it would help working people when it has done the opposite.

Chancellor George Osborne has been blinded by rosy job and GDP statistics. They tell you nothing about real life.

Mr Cameron must rebalance his Government’s priorities. How can we spend £50billion on a rail line, or £12billion a year on foreign aid, while our own poor cannot buy a home, pay the rent or get their kids into the local school?

The Tories must put billions into equipping OUR communities with the infrastructure to cope with a population soaring out of control.

Working people have no power beyond the vote they cast yesterday.

Well they have exercised that power now and given themselves a glimmer of hope.

