Europe’s leaders tell UK voters ‘out is out’ as they warn against Brexit

2016-6-22

EUROPE’S leaders have ganged up with David Cameron to warn there would be no second deal on offer if Britain votes for Brexit, declaring: "Out is out".

Every time a member country has voted down a new EU treaty or plan so far, it has always been offered better terms.

But the UK would not be, because “the future of the European Union at stake”, Francois Hollande insisted today.

The French president also dubbed tomorrow’s landmark vote "irreversible", parroting the PM’s campaign mantra.

And issuing a new veiled threat, Brexit would put Britain at "very serious risk" of losing access to the bloc's single market, Mr Hollande added.

Federalist EU Commission boss Jean Claude Juncker told a Brussels audience that Mr Cameron had already “got the maximum” with his renegotiation in February, which was panned by Tory MPs.

Mr Juncker insisted: “British voters have to know that there will not be any kind of renegotiation.

"We have concluded a deal with the prime minister, he got the maximum he could receive, we gave the maximum we could give.

"Out is out."

While reinforcing the Premier’s message, the last-minute stern warnings could also backfire on the Remain campaign if they encourage British voters to rebel.

Mr Juncker also slammed the idea of giving people a say, in words guaranteed to be attacked by Leave campaigners as arrogant.

Saying he is “basically not a big fan of referendums”, the Brussels chief and former Luxembourg PM added: “Voters can be easily misled by sideshows.

”You always get the sweats when someone dares to ask the people for its opinion.

 

Mr Juncker also admitted Brexit would “damage” the EU project, adding: “The British need the EU and the EU needs British pragmatism".

German leader Angela Merkel held back from an eleventh hour threat after a plea from No10 to stay out of the fight four weeks ago.

Instead Mrs Merkel issued a plea to voters to back Remain, saying: “Of course I want Britain to stay in the EU but the decision is with British citizens,"

On Tuesday, Mr Cameron urged Sun readers to back Britain staying in the EU so he could reform it from within.

The PM claimed: “If we stay in, that is not the end of reform.

“Britain will be in a very enhanced position.”

