BBC cancel TV debate on EU referendum as all campaigning suspended for the day in the wake of Jo Cox’s murder

2016-6-17

A TV debate on the EU referendum has been cancelled as all campaigning has been suspended for the day in the wake of Jo Cox’s murder.

Speeches by Leave campaigners Michael Gove and Nigel Farage have been postponed and there are calls for Parliament to be recalled as tributes pour in to the slain MP.

With just days to go until the crucial vote on Britain’s membership of the European Union hostilities have been put on hold as the world of politics comes together to mourn the mum-of-two.

Mrs Cox was repeatedly stabbed and shot in her West Yorkshire constituency yesterday, later dying of her injuries.

Police arrested a 52-year-old man, named locally as Tommy Mair,  shortly afterwards in connection with the incident, and he is being held in custody.

Both official campaigns suspended their activities as a mark of respect shortly after the attack.

The BBC has cancelled a planned Andrew Neil interview with Leave campaigner Iain Duncan Smith that was due to be broadcast on Friday evening.

And in Wales a debate featuring four of the country’s political leaders is also not now going ahead.

First Minister Carwyn Jones and Plaid Cymru leader Leanne Wood were due to make the case for the Remain side, while Conservative MP David Jones and Ukip Wales leader Nathan Gill were set to present the arguments for Leave.

BBC Wales' press office tweeted: "In light of the death of MP Jo Cox, tonight's BBC Wales debate is not going ahead as planned."

And an International Monetary Fund review of the UK economy due out today will now be published on Saturday.

Christine Lagarde, director of the IMF, said the killing is time for "reflection" about the nature of Britain's referendum debate.

Asked about their forecasts on the impact of Brexit.  "I'm not going to address your question out of respect for Jo Cox.

"For what is happening at the moment."

"A bit of reflection we can all have about how a democratic debate should take place."

My interview tonight with IDS on BBC1 has been cancelled.

Last night Prime Minister David Cameron cancelled a rally he had been planning to hold in Gibraltar.

And in London the Chancellor George Osborne scrapped his speech at the annual Mansion House dinner in the City of London, instead paying tribute to Mrs Cox.

Today a poster launch by Nigel Farage and a speech were cancelled, while some have called for Parliament – currently in recess for the referendum – to be recalled in order to pay tribute to the MP.

Labour's Angela Smith told BBC Two's Newsnight: "I would welcome that because I would love to pay tribute to Jo in the best way possible, which is for her colleagues to reconvene and to absolutely use parliamentary democracy to demonstrate that democracy will not be beaten by this."

