Three Lions legend John Barnes slams claims by Michael Gove that he supports ‘Leave’

2016-6-21

Former England winger John Barnes has hit back at claims by Michael Gove that he backs Brexit.

Speaking with Sky News, the Liverpool and Watford legend insists his views had been "misinterpreted” and that he had “categorically” told the Leave campaign that he was in the Remain camp.

While addressing David Beckham’s support for Remain, the Justice Secretary told the broadcaster on Tuesday that footy icon Barnes had backed Britain leaving the European Union.

But the 52-year-old midfield maestro made it clear how he would be voting on June 23.

He said: "How this happened was I gave an interview stating that for English football it would be better off being out of the EU because, of course, we couldn't get all of these European players coming in as easily, so it would be better for English footballers.

"That was then misinterpreted as I'm supporting the Leave campaign.

"I got a call the very next day, this is about a month ago, saying 'oh thank you very much for your support' - and I made it categorically clear that speaking from the point of view of English footballers, it would be better off, but I don't support the Leave campaign because that's a very selfish view of me looking just at English football.

"I've got to think about what I think is right for the country. I made it plain that I do not support them, I support Remain.”

And Barnes rubbed salt in Gove’s wounds by insisting that Britain had a "moral responsibility” to sort out the migrant crisis which he said the UK had helped create.

The Jamaican-born sportsman said he was "flabbergasted" at the prospect of the country being "the first to jump ship when the going gets tough".

Fellow Three Lions legend Beckham earlier announced he will be voting to stay in Europe, saying "together as a people we are strong".

In a Facebook post, the Manchester United icon said playing in cities such as Madrid, Milan and Paris had shown him the importance of a "vibrant and connected world".

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

 

