Political heavyweight Ken Clarke to quit politics after 50 years in Parliament

2016-6-19

VETERAN TORY and former Chancellor Ken Clarke has revealed plans to quit politics after 50 years in Westminster.

The one-time Conservative leadership contender has told constituency officers they will need to find a “successor” to contest his seat at the 2020 General Election.

In an interview with China Daily the Europhile said: “I will not stand again.

“This is my last Parliament.”

The announcement came with another parting shot at Brexit campaigners.

The 75 year-old said any Government implementing a leave vote would “actually be a minority government”.

Senior Tory backbencher Nicholas Soames immediately said it was a “big, big loss”.

Ken Clarke has served as MP for Rushcliffe in Nottingham since 1970.

He remains tied with Labour’s Dennis Skinner as the longest serving MP in Parliament.

He is best known as a prominent member of Margaret Thatcher’s governments of the 1980s - and wearing suede Hush Puppies shoes.

Ken Clarke served as Chancellor and Home Secretary under John Major but lost out to William Hague in the race to replace him as Tory leader after the 1997 Election.

He was brought back to the Tory frontbench as Justice Secretary under David Cameron in 2010 but was slammed for going “soft”. He was slammed by then Mayor of London Boris Johnson for plans to bring in shorter jail sentences.

Mr Clarke resigned as Minister without Portfolio two years ago, with a warning to the PM that his last battle would be ensuring Britain remained in the EU.

At the time, Lord Howard, the former Tory leader , praised his colleague for making an “extraordinary contribution to our public life”.

Speaking to China Daily, Ken Clarke said he would be “relieved” if voters backed staying with Brussels.

He said: “If we vote to remain because short-term consequences will be quite unpleasant.

“I cannot tell you how severe but if the currency collapsed you would have a significant increase in interest rates.”

