David Cameron refuses FOUR TIMES to say if he would veto Turkey’s EU membership

2016-6-20

DAVID CAMERON last night refused FOUR TIMES to say whether he would veto Turkey’s membership of the EU.

The PM insisted it was the biggest “red herring” of the Referendum campaign despite the EU spending a fortune to help the country prepare for accession.

Asked by the audience if he would block Turkey’s membership, Mr Cameron said: “Well I don’t think it’s going to happen for decades so as far as I’m concerned I don’t think that question arises.

“At this rate they will join in the year 3000.”

Challenged again by BBC presenter David Dimbleby whether he would actually veto Turkey’s membership, the PM said: “It’s not going to come up.”

Asked a third time he said: “I’m not going to be PM in three decades time.

“If this was going to happen in the next couple of years I would not support it, but it’s not going to.”

Probed a fourth time whether he would he would block Turkey he said: “Let me explain why Britain has always been very favourable to Turkey, we want Turkey to be a western leaning democracy.

“We want it to have a rule of law, we want them not to be imprisoning journalists.

“Frankly it’s not going very well at the moment and let me just say again - I don’t want anyone to vote on the basis of Turkey joining, because it’s not going to happen.”

But Vote Leave last night insisted British embassy staff in multiple non-EU countries including Turkey and Serbia were working to facilitate their entry into the EU.

They added the Government webpage for the British embassy in Ankara says “we have a dedicated team working on projects to improve Turkey’s prospects of joining”.

Experts believe 100,000 Turks a year will come to Britain once Turkey becomes a full EU member.

The UK is paying £1.2 billion between 2014 and 2020 to help Albania, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and Turkey “prepare for accession”.

Vote Leave chief Matthew Elliott said: “Cameron had no answers to people’s legitimate concerns on immigration tonight and failed to set out how he would meet his manifesto pledge to bring the numbers back down to the tens of thousands while remaining in the EU.

He had no answer on how we would fund the NHS to cope with higher levels of immigration.

“He has avoided speaking to the British public throughout the campaign because he knows that they do not believe him anymore on the EU.

“It showed tonight as he was openly mocked by the audience.”

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368.

 

