Fury as IMF head Christine Lagarde warns Britain to vote Remain… or face losing 500k jobs

2016-6-17

IMF CHIEF Christine Lagarde launched a blistering attack on Brexit-backers yesterday as the global watchdog said an ‘Out’ vote would trigger half a million job cuts.

The French diplomat said she had always admired British “openness to other nationalities and cultures” and it was “hard to believe attitudes had changed in such a short space of time”.

She added that it was only because of the EU that the UK had been transformed into a “dynamic and vibrant” economy – helped by “talented and hard-working” migrants.

Brexit-supporters last night branded the comments “shameful” – and insisted they wanted to leave the EU to go global.

Ms Lagarde’s blast came as the IMF said a Brexit would also plunge the UK into recession in 2017, shrink the economy by almost 6 per cent and send inflation sky high.

A doom-laden report said added that there would be “permanently lower” household incomes and any saving from leaving the EU would be more than offset by the huge hit to trade.

IMF officials added there would “inevitably” be a big cut to the size of the public sector.

Overall, the unemployment rate would rise under a worst-case scenario from the current 5 per cent to 6.5 per cent in 2019 – around half a million jobs.

Separately, Italian Matteo Renzi said he was convinced Brits were too clever to vote for a Brexit.

He said: “I believe that the British are much wiser than what we see in the polls.”

The row followed a bitter of war of words over an apocalyptic warning from the Bank of England on Thursday morning.

Before Jo Cox’s horrific murder, Boris Johnson slammed Bank of England Governor Mark Carney for “talking Britain down” for saying a Brexit was the “largest immediate risk” to global financial markets.

In a stark warning, the BoE said it was “increasingly likely” the Pound would collapse after a vote to leave.

And the Bank said Brits were putting off buying cars and houses because they were so nervous about the possibility of an out vote.

It triggered a furious response from former Tory Chancellors Lord Lawson and Norman Lamont who accused the BoE of “startling dishonesty”.

The IMF report was due out on Thursday night before being delayed 24 hours in the wake of Jo Cox’s death.

Speaking yesterday morning Ms Lagarde begged Brits to vote remain next week – but warned it was clear the risks of leaving were “firmly on the downside”.

She said: “There is, in my view, a clear case as to how the UK has benefited – and will continue to benefit from its membership in the European Union.

“Membership in the EU has made the UK a richer economy, but it has also made it a more diverse, more exciting and more creative country.”

Her comments enraged Brexit supporters who were already livid at the timing of the intervention by the most powerful financial organisation in the world.

UKIP Douglas Carswell called Ms Lagarde’s comments “shameful” and accused the Treasury of “choreographing” the report with the IMF.

UK officials are limited in what they can say on EU membership by ‘purdah’ rules which kicked in 21 days ago.

Mr Carswell told the Sun: “It’s shameful that people at the IMF are trying to misrepresent people supporting a vote to leave. People who want to leave want to go global, that’s the point.”

He added: “The IMF thought the Euro would be a good thing, they thought the banks in 2006 were doing just fine that we were living within our means when we weren’t. They were wrong then, and they are wrong now.”

Vote Leave chief Matthew Elliott added: “The IMF has chosen to ignore the positive benefits of leaving the EU and instead focused only on the supposed negatives.”

The IMF plotted two scenarios but said Britain would be worst off under both.

Even a relatively smooth transition, would have “material” impact on growth and incomes.

Under a “limited” impact, the IMF said Britain would adopt a Norway-style model where it signs up to the single market, has no influence in EU rule-making, but has to accept free movement of migrants.

In a conference call, IMF officials said economists were in near universal agreement that a Brexit would be negative.

But they admitted their forecasts assumed no action by the BoE to shore up the economy, such as an interest rate cut.

The IMF’s moves came as EU leaders bombarded Brits with yet more warnings.

Speaking in Russia alongside Vladimir Putin, Italian PM Matteo Renzi warned that if the UK leaves Europe “it is forever”.

He said: “It’s not there is first a home match and then an away game.”

But he added: “I think victory will be claimed by those who want to stay in Europe.”

Separately German finance minister Wolfgang Schauble said Europe was well prepared to respond to current Brexit-related anxiety.

EU Council chief Donald Tusk, Commission President Jean Claude Juncker and European Parliament chief Martin Schulz will hold a special meeting on June 24 – the day after the Referendum.

The outcome of the historic poll is set to dominate a summit of member state leaders in Brussels on June 28-29.

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368.

 

