What has Katie Price done to her face now?

2016-6-23

SURGERY lover Katie Price has shocked fans after stepping out with a frozen-looking face on Wednesday.

The 38-year-old smiled for the cameras as she left the ITV studios in London, but fans were quick to wonder if Katie had had more work done.

Taking to Twitter, one simply wrote: "Wtf happened to Katie Price face?"

Another joked: "Judging by the opinion polls , tomorrow's #EUreferendum vote is tighter than Katie Price's new face."

The Loose Women panellist has never been afraid to talk about her love of cosmetic procedures, and last month she shared pictures of herself having three different treatments done in the same day.

The mother-of-five had Botox, lipo-suction and lip fillers, and snapped plenty of selfies from the surgery chair.

In the first snap, Katie had white cream around her lips and cheekbones, and she captioned it: "Hey what am I up to", before adding another picture of a machine on her stomach, which fans quickly identified as Cryolipolysis, a nonsurgical medical treatment used to destroy fat cells.

Katie was clearly pleased with the process, as she wrote alongside the snap: "Wow this is amazing".

Her third treatment was to have some filler put into her lips, and showing off her new smile, Katie wrote: "Absolute love my lips and smile with my new lips."

To round off the mammoth treatment session, the former glamour model posted another image of her baring her stomach while wearing a #selfie top.

She said: "What a great day all about the selfies haha top @jyy.london my 3D lipo from @macaesthetics botox top up and my lips it's not about my boobs today as everyone seems fascinated."

Fans could clearly see the results on Wednesday, but not all of them were impressed by what Katie had done to her face.

After Katie took part in a Channel 4 debate about the EU Referendum later in the day, more viewers felt the need to pass comment on her appearance.

One wrote: "#c4debate what happened to Katie price's face?It's as brown as a brown thing and her mouth seems 3" wider than before!" while another added: "Looks like Katie Price's lips have tried to #leave her face #c4debate".

While Katie has yet to hit back at her critics, she recently gushed about her new boobs, after going under the knife for the EIGHTH time in her quest for the perfect pair.

She wrote on Instagram alongside a snap of her lying in bed: “Woo finally I’m healed happy have amazing boobs at last thank you to Dr Plover at Be Clinic Brussels your the best (sic).”

