Damon Albarn, JK Rowling and other celebs slammed after claiming Brexit shows Britons are ‘chippy and economically illiterate’

2016-6-24

ARROGANT celebs have slammed Brits who voted for Brexit saying “democracy has failed us” as the nation awakes to the result that Britain will no longer be a part of the EU.

As the Brexit news filtered through to the crowds at Glastonbury Festival, former Blur frontman Damon Albarn spoke out about the EU referendum result.

Beginning his performance with the Orchestra of Syrian Musicians on the Pyramid Stage, the singer said: "I have a very heavy heart today, because, to my mind, democracy has failed us.
"Democracy has failed us because it was ill-informed.
"And I just want all of you to know that when you leave here, we can change that decision.
“It is possible."

It is not known how he thinks the Glasto revellers can change the decision as both sides of the EU referendum debate made it clear during the campaign that there is no going back.

And last night a majority of voters decided choosing to leave the EU was the best option for Britain.

And former Blue Peter presenter Richard Bacon also poured scorn on Brexit supporters blasting them as inward looking and economically illiterate.

He tweeted: "I feel so sad. It's so inward looking. So ungrateful to Eastern European immigrants. So chippy. So economically illiterate. So sad."

Harry Potter creator JK Rowling tweeted that she'd never "wanted magic more" to go back and change the result, adding: "Scotland will seek independence now. Cameron's legacy will be breaking up two unions. Neither needed to happen."

TV star James Corden also rushed the slam the decision to leave, writing on the social media site: "I can't get my head around what's happening in Britain. I'm so sorry to the youth of Britain. I fear you've been let down today."

While business magnate Richard Branson added: "Leaving the EU is a very sad decision that will do huge damage to Britain’s prosperity & Europe’s stability."

Taking the mickey out of the UK Independence Party (UKIP), whose leader Nigel Farage has been a key player in the Vote Leave camp, former footballer and TV presenter Gary Lineker tweeted: "'U kip for a couple of hours and look what happens. What have we gone and done?"

Before yesterday's vote artists, actors and musicians from across the country had signed a "luvvies letter" calling on Brits to vote to stay in the EU because leaving would make our country "less imaginative".

The letter, signed by 250 of Britain's top celebs including singer Paloma Faith, 50 Shades of Grey director Sam Taylor-Wood, and 12 Years a Slave star Chiwetel Ejiofor, warned Brexit could undermine the creative arts industry because many projects are supported by cash provided by the EU.

Tracey Emin, Steve Coogan, Sir Patrick Stewart, Dame Kristin Scott Thomas, Keira Knightley, Jude Law, Eddie Izzard, Bill Nighy, Jenny Agutter and Jessie Ware were also among those who signed the letter written to the Guardian newspaper.

It said: "From the smallest gallery to the biggest blockbuster, many of us have worked on projects that would never have happened without vital EU funding or by collaborating across borders.

Britain is not just stronger in Europe, it is more imaginative and more creative, and our global creative success would be severely weakened by walking away.

From the Bard to Bowie, British creativity inspires and influences the rest of the world,' it says.

We believe that being part of the EU bolsters Britain's leading role on the world stage.

And what would 'out' really mean? Leaving Europe would be a leap into the unknown for millions of people across the UK who work in the creative industries, and for the millions more at home and abroad who benefit from the growth and vibrancy of Britain's cultural sector."

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

 

