Thousands of Brit holidaymakers are hit by travel chaos as French air traffic controllers strike causing hundreds of BA, easyJet and Ryanair flights to be cancelled

2016-6-23

BRITS heading off on holiday to escape the wet and wild weather are facing travel chaos today as airlines have cancelled hundreds of flights due to air traffic control strikes in France.

A number of major airlines, including BA, easyJet and Ryanair, have been forced to cancel dozens of routes across Europe.

This is the 10th day French air traffic controllers have taken part in industrial action in the last three months alone.

Flights to and from French airports are affected as well as routes to other European destinations such as Spain.

Affected passengers were only made aware of the possible cancellations yesterday afternoon - with some claiming they weren't actually given a reason why.

Hundreds of England fans have been left stranded in France after several flights to Euro 2016 host cities were axed and passengers told not to bother turning up at the terminal.

The strikes have also meant a number of people can't return to the UK today to vote in the historic EU referendum.

Posting on Twitter Jamie Hilsden wrote: "Flight delayed by 2 and half hours going to Spain this morning with Ryanair! Bloody French strikes!"

While Brett Morse posted: "Olympic trials in 2 days....@easyJet flight from Portugal to Luton cancelled.... please help!"

And Dan Gourd added: "@David_Cameron @easyJet my easyJet flight from Marseille to Gatwick 2moro is cancelled so I cant vote on the EU referendum!! What can I do??"

Lizzie wrote: "@Ryanair Manchester to Barcelona flight 6.30 tomorrow cancelled less than 24 hours notice, what are we supposed to do? Worst service"

While Antony Begley posted: "Hello @Ryanair Still waiting. You just cancelled my flight tomorrow morn and all of your systems are down. Any chance you can update me?"

So far easyJet has cancelled 60 flights due to depart on Thursday - including 40 which pass through the UK.

A company statement said: "We would like to inform customers that there will be a French National Strike on Thursday, June 23. This will have an impact on our flights to and from French airports, as well as those flying in French airspace.

"As the strike will affect all French airports we have taken the decision to proactively cancel a number of flights, allowing customers to reorganise their journeys.  We are taking further steps to minimise the impact of the strike on our customers but may see delays during the day.

"Although this situation is outside our control we’re sorry for any inconvenience this may cause to your travel plans."

Ryanair has had to cancel 56 so far - including 10 services to Luton, Stansted, Manchester and Newcastle.

A statement on Ryanair's website said: "We regret to advise customers that due to an air traffic control strike in France on June 23, 2016, we have been forced to cancel flights.

"Unfortunately, further flight delays and cancellations are likely and customers are asked to please monitor this notice which will be updated throughout the day. Ryanair sincerely apologises for any inconvenience caused by these unjustified ATC disruptions which are entirely outside of our control."

While BA says it is offering customers the chance to re-book their flight up to Tuesday, June 28 regardless of whether or not it's running.

A statement on the airline's website said: "A national strike across France including some of the main Air Traffic Control trade unions on Thursday, June 23 will unfortunately bring yet another day of unnecessary disruption for some customers travelling in Europe.
"We are sorry that your flight could face disruption, which is beyond our control, and we recognise that you may not wish to travel as a result.

"Unfortunately we will have to cancel some flights as a result of the strike action and other short-haul flights may also experience some disruption, given how many flights would normally use French airspace each day.
"We will be using larger aircraft, where possible, to help affected customers and are doing all we can to reduce the levels of disruption."


The strikes come after the French government tabled a bill that makes it easier to sack employees, makes the working week longer and weakens union powers.

The bill has sparked months of protests that often turn to violence by small groups of extremist demonstrators clashing with riot police.

Have you been affected by the travel chaos? Email us kathryn.cain@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368.

 

