Michael Gove calls on Brits to dump the EU as Boris says imagine the ‘shock’ of a slim Remain win

2016-6-19

MICHAEL Gove yesterday urged Brits to show their faith in the UK by voting to dump the EU on referendum day.

The Justice Secretary told Vote Leave’s supporters: “The values of the British people are open, tolerant and inclusive and on Thursday we have a chance to vote for those values by voting to show that we believe in Britain.”

The rallying cry came as Boris Johnson made a last ditch plea for Brits to back a Brexit.

He asked voters if they really wanted to see hated Eurocrat Jean Claude Juncker popping open the bubbly on Friday morning.

Speaking in Central London at the Leave campaign’s re-launch event, BoJo warned that a Remain vote would be a green light for the EU to carry on “unchastened, unbound, unaccountable, undemocratic and profoundly unreformed.”

He told Brexit supporters to “cast your minds forward to very early on Friday morning, and you’re slowly coming to consciousness with the sense of the mildly — perhaps seriously — hungover.

“And you look around and can see half drunk cans of beer and scrunched up crisp packets and the television still burbling faintly in the corner of the room.

“And you have a terrible sense that something momentous has happened in the eyes of our country and the whole European Union.

The people who lead the European Union have never said sorry, never apologised, never admitted that they’ve got anything wrong

“And you try to remember what it is and then it hits you with a terrible sense of shock and disappointment — that Remain have narrowly won.

“Imagine that, and the cameras are going to Brussels where Jean Claude Juncker is celebrating with what looks suspiciously like champagne.”

Speaking on his 52nd birthday, Mr Johnson added: “And you realise with a terrible sense of disappointment that our nation came centre stage of a battle and we missed a fantastic opportunity for change and improvement in this country.”

Mr Gove said leaving the EU will not just be a “vote of confidence” for Britain but will show solidarity with those in struggling economies such as Greece and Spain who have suffered because of the EU.

He said: “The people who lead the European Union have never said sorry, never apologised, never admitted that they’ve got anything wrong."

The pair were joined onstage at Old Billingsgate Market, in the City by Jobs Minister Priti Patel and former No. 10 adviser Steve Hilton.
The PM's former policy “guru”, who has joined Vote Leave, said Brussels was “probably one of the most corrupt places on the planet.”

Mr Hilton claimed he had “noticed a really interesting flaw at the heart of the Remain campaign.”

“Remain are promising you no change, they are guaranteeing nothing will change, they are promising more of the same,” he said.

“More of the same uncontrolled immigration; more of the same, bureaucracy and red tape; more of the same old fashioned, control over the things that matter in our lives.”

“Now I don’t think people want more of the same.

“People in this country want change.”

Remain are promising you no change ... They are promising more of the same

The London rally was the official event organised the by the Leave camp after campaigning was suspended on Thursday following the death of Jo Cox.

Yesterday morning Michael Gove gave a touching tribute to the slain Labour MP.

He told the BBC she was the sort of person we would “want our daughters to grow up to be”.

Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

