Brexit: What does the UK leaving the European Union mean for sport in this country?

2016-6-24

THE UK has spoken and Brexit is now official.

Whilst the politics twists and turns on a landmark day in our history, SunSport asks what this means for sport and how things might change.

1 FOOTBALL - WORK PERMITS

CURRENTLY, players coming from EU countries do not need a work permit to play in England - but that could all change.

This will all depend on the regulations brought in by the FA and Home Office.

If they're similar to the current rules for non-EU players, then players moving to English leagues will have had to have played a certain percentage of international football before moving.

The particular amount depends on the country involved - and their FIFA ranking.

If these rules were imposed right now, over 100 players in the Premier League wouldn't have been granted a work permit.

Fear not, this doesn't mean that any players currently playing in England are going to be kicked out.

But you wouldn't have been watching stars such as Dmitri Payet, Anthony Martial or N'Golo Kante if they'd been approached under non-EU rules.


2 FOOTBALL - TRANSFER FEES

IN THE short term, transfer fees could be affected by the financial uncertainty affecting the UK.

With the Pound struggling against the Euro, it will now cost more than ever to buy from Europe.

Of course, with the huge influx of cash from the monster TV deal arriving this summer into the English leagues, these hikes will only be a drop in the ocean.

But with transfer fees rising all the time, will there eventually be a breaking point?

Greg Dyke is still confident that English football will flourish regardless.

The FA chairman said: "It could take two years to really know, but there could be quite an impact on English football because of Brexit.

"It would be a shame if some of the great European players can't come here but I don't think that will happen. Whether the total number reduces will depend on the terms of the exit."

3 CRICKET & RUGBY - KOLPACK AGREEMENT

THE KOLPAK Agreement allows cricketers from South Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific Islands to come over and play in the English domestic leagues.

In doing so, they give up the right to play for his country.

This ruling has seen players such as Andrew Strauss, Kevin Pietersen and Faf du Plessis.

Brexit will render the Kolpak agreement void in the UK, which could result in a far less diverse talent pool.

There are currently 70 cricketers playing here under the Kolpack ruling.

And the same number participate in the Aviva Premiership.

4 BOXING - VISA ISSUES

OVER the past five years, there has been a steady increase in fighters visiting the UK for bouts.

515 overseas boxers have fought on professional cards since January - many of whom on short notice.

Again, with things so uncertain changes aren't set in stone, but getting these visas quickly once out of the EU will most probably be far more difficult.

General Secretary of the British Boxing Board Robert Smith previously said: "It may affect the time allocation with visas for European fighters, which was previously not the case.

"Small hall promoters use a lot of European fighters on their cards, some as late replacements, and it will now depend on how the Home Office legislate this."

 


5 ATHLETICS - TEAM GB

IN the short term, Athletics is unlikely to feel much of a pinch from Brexit.

EU nationals will probably be able to get visas to compete here, whilst prize money is often dished out in dollars so the strength of the pound is not an issue.

Way down the line though, should Scotland persue a second referendum on their independence and break away from the UK, Team GB could lose Scottish stars such as Lynsey Sharp and Laura Muir.

