‘Thousands of bankers set to leave London’ as Britain votes Brexit

2016-6-24

TWO giant investment banks have already pushed the start button on shipping thousands of bankers out of London just hours after Britain voted for Brexit, it is claimed.

US firm Morgan Stanley is understood to have started the process of moving 2,000 London-based staff out of London to Dublin and Frankfurt.

The BBC reported that staff working in euro clearing would be the first to go followed by other investment banking functions and senior management.

The move would be to benefit from the financial passporting system which allows banks to offer services to all countries in the EU without having to establish a permanent base there. It is unclear how long Britain will continue to benefit from the system for after 52 per cent of the British public voted for Brexit.

Just two days ago the president of Morgan Stanley, Colm Kelleher, said Brexit would be “the most consequential thing that we’ve ever seen since the war”.

Sun Online as contacted Morgan Stanley for comment.

In a separate development, the CEO of JP Morgan also wrote a memo warning all 16,000 employees in the UK to expect some moves from the UK in the months ahead, but called for calm.

In a leaked memo seen by Business Insider, he told staff: “The framework of the UK's engagement with the EU, including trade agreements, will be negotiated over a period of years.

“For the moment, we will continue to serve our clients as usual, and our operating model in the U.K. remains the same.

“In the months ahead, however, we may need to make changes to our European legal entity structure and the location of some roles.

“While these changes are not certain, we have to be prepared to comply with new laws as we serve our clients around the world.”

Today the City immediately plunged into panic as the markets opened at 8am, wiping more than £100billion off the value of the FTSE 100 within minutes.

But the markets soon settled and at 3pm the FTSE 100 was only down 1.9 per cent - an improvement on the start of the week.

