Emotional scenes as Samantha Cameron watches her husband resign as Prime Minister

2016-6-24

DAVID Cameron's doting wife looked devastated as she watched her defeated husband resign as Prime Minister after losing his fight to stay in the European Union.

Sobbing Samantha stood at the sidelines as a rock of support for the PM who admitted "this ship needs a new captain" following a vote for Brexit by millions of people across the UK.

Cameron grabbed his wife's hand after an emotional three-minute speech outside Downing Street before disappearing through No 10 without answering any questions from the press.

"The British people have voted to leave the European Union and their will must be respected," Cameron said.

"The country requires fresh leadership to take it in this direction."

He added: "I will do everything I can as Prime Minister to steady the ship over the coming weeks and months, but I do not think it would be right for me to try to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination.

"This is not a decision I've taken lightly but I do believe it's in the national interest to have a period of stability and then the new leadership required."

Although there was sorrow for the Camerons, a joyful Boris Johnson said the Brexit vote is a“glorious opportunity” to regain power over our borders and laws hours.

The former London Mayor praised his fellow Tory and old friend as “one of the most extraordinary politicians of our age” in a press conference for the victorious Vote Leave campaign just hours after his resignation.

Gove applauded the PM for leading the UK with "courage, dignity and grace".

"He deserves to be remembered as a great Prime Minister," he added.

Johnson said: "I believe we now have a glorious opportunity - we can pass our laws and set our taxes entirely to the needs of the UK economy

"We can control our borders in a way that is not discriminatory, but fair and balanced and take the wind out of the sails of the extremists and those who would play politics with immigration.

"Above all, we can find our voice in the world again... powerful, liberal, humane, an extraordinary force for good in the world."

As a three-month contest begins for Conservative leadership, Labour was also plunged deeper into a crisis as MPs call for Jeremy Corbyn to resign as leader.

Some said he should be forced to quit after his "seemingly half-hearted" support for the UK to remain in the European Union.

One senior MP said: “He is toast.

"If we go into a general election with him as leader, we will be wiped out. The shadow cabinet has got to tell him to go.”

Another added: “Jeremy’s campaign and its focus on freedom of movement showed he clearly does not understand the mood of the country.

"Labour should be looking for a new leader.”

Members of the Labour Party have this afternoon submitted a no-confidence motion in leader Jeremy Corbyn.

Senior Labour MP Dame Margaret Hodge filed a motion which was seconded by Ann Coffey - but Corbyn has refused to stand down.

It's right that David Cameron has gone. Not a bad man just on the wrong side of the argument.

Jubilant Nigel Farage has been celebrating Britain's Independence Day as he plots to make June 23 a Bank Holiday.

The Ukip leader delivered his post EU referendum result speech in London this morning.

He said: "The EU is failing, the EU is dying and I hope we've knocked the first brick out of the wall.

"I hope this is the first step towards a Europe of sovereign nation states; trading together, neighbours together, friends together - but without flags, anthems or useless old unelected presidents."

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team?

Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368.

 

 

 

 

