Economic ‘experts’ warning about negative effects of a Brexit are like the Nazis who ran a smear campaign against Albert Einstein, says Michael Gove

2016-6-22

ECONOMIC experts warning about the effects of Brexit have been compared to the Nazis who orchestrated a smear campaign against Albert Einstein in the 1930s by Michael Gove.

The Brexit-backing Tory said experts cannot always be trusted by pointing to the German scientists who denounced the famous physicist to back up his point.

The Justice Secretary told LBC: "I think the key thing here is to interrogate the assumptions that are made and to ask if these arguments are good.

"We have to be careful about historical comparisons, but Albert Einstein during the 1930s was denounced by the German authorities for being wrong and his theories were denounced, and one of the reasons of course he was denounced was because he was Jewish.

"They got 100 German scientists in the pay of the government to say that he was wrong and Einstein said: 'Look, if I was wrong, one would have been enough.'"

Mr Gove, who co-chairs the Vote Leave campaign, added: "The truth is that if you look at the quality of the analysis, if you look at the facts on the ground, you can come to an appropriate conclusion.

"And the appropriate conclusion, I think, all of us can come to is that with growth rates so low in Europe, with so many unemployed and with the nature of the single currency so damaging, freeing ourselves from that project can only strengthen our economy."

He made his comments after being challenged over why he is not heeding the advice of many economists who have warned that Brexit could have dire consequences and tip the economy into recession.

The International Monetary Fund, ten Nobel-prize winning economists and the Bank of England have all warned that leaving the EU could damage the economy.

The minister said he will “reflect” on whether to stay in the Cabinet after a Remain vote after warning Britain cannot get net migration below 100,000 a year while still inside the EU.

Asked on the Today programme whether he would quit the government, Mr Gove said: “I will do exactly as the Prime Minister asks me.”

Pushed again, he added: “I want people to concentrate not on my job but on their jobs. Of course, depending on what the result is on Friday, I will reflect and I will decide what is the best course for me.”

