Heartfelt tribute to Jo Cox by Labour’s newest MP Rosena Allin-Khan after victory in Tooting by-election

2016-6-17

LABOUR’S newest member of parliament paid a heartfelt tribute to the murdered MP Jo Cox after winning the Tooting by-election last night.

Rosena Allin-Khan has become the south London constituency’s new MP after Sadiq Khan stepped down to run his successful campaign to become London Mayor.

She would have become the Opposition’s 100th MP but the figure is stuck on 99 after mother-of-two Jo Cox was brutally killed yesterday afternoon.

Instead of giving a speech last night, Dr Allin-Khan said: “Given the horrific events of today and the shocking death of Jo Cox, I do not intend to make a speech.

“Instead, I would like to make a short statement.

“First of all, I would like to give my profound thanks to the people of Tooting for electing me as their MP.

“But my thoughts and prayers are with Jo’s husband and her children.

“She was a proud and passionate campaigner who will be desperately missed.

“Jo’s death reminds us that our democracy is precious but fragile – we must never forget to cherish it.

Dr Allin-Khan added: “Thousands of people voted today and we are all here in recognition of our democratic values.

“I would like to thank the police for all the hard work they have done today, not just here but across the country.

“I would like to thank the returning officer and staff for their efficient and smooth running of this by-election, and I would also like to thank my agent and his campaign staff.

“I would like to thank the other candidates for the respectful way in which this by-election has been fought.

“And lastly, I would like to thank my family and friends for their love and support.

“Thank you very much.”

The results were declared just after 1:00am on Friday morning — three hours after polls closed at 10:00pm on Thursday.

Labour gained 8.6% on the result from the 2015 General Election with 17,894 votes.

Conservative Party candidate Dan Watkins secured 11,537 votes.

The Green Party mustered 830 votes, beating the Lib Dems into fourth with 820. UKIP managed just 507 votes.

Before the results were announced, a two-minute silence was held in a tribute to Labour MP Jo Cox.

The Batley and Spen MP was shot and stabbed to death yesterday afternoon.

Wandsworth Mayor Richard Field said he wanted to “express the sadness everyone involved in this by-election has felt”.

Paul Martin, the returning officer, said the killing had “shocked the entire country.”

“It has hit home particularly hard in Tooting where right now the community is in the process of selecting a new member of Parliament to represent their interests”, he said.

“It is our duty and responsibility to continue with this by-election, but clearly a very dark shadow has been cast over these proceedings.

“The flag over Wandsworth Town Hall is now flying at half mast and we will hold a two-minute silence during this evening’s count to reflect upon this awful loss.”

He added: “Our thoughts, prayers and deep condolences are with Jo’s family and loved ones at this incredibly difficult time.”

There was a low turnout of just 42.5%, with 31,763 votes cast out of 74,701 eligible voters.

Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

