French air traffic control strikes stop Brits getting home to vote on Brexit – so Ryanair offers them vouchers to get a free Burger King meal

2016-6-23

HUNDREDS of Brits face being unable to vote in today's historic EU referendum after flights were cancelled leaving them stranded across Europe because of French air traffic control strikes.

People as far flung as France and Spain are unable to return home to vote on Brexit today due to the strikes - the 10th day of action in the last three months - which forced major airlines to cancel hundreds of flights.

Some Brits stuck in Valencia were offered some compensation though for their loss - with Ryanair texting them vouchers for five Euros off a meal at the airport's Burger King branch.

Student Luc Hinson was due to leave the Spanish city and return back to London Stansted this morning but says his flight has been delayed by more than two hours and the delay keeps getting longer.

The 21-year-old from Wendover Buckinghamshire, who has spent the last year in Valencia on the Erasmus student exchange programme, told The Sun: "We weren't told about the delay until five minutes before boarding was due to start. At the moment it's delayed by two hours and 17 minutes but that keeps increasing.

"I chose to fly back on this date so I could have my vote in my own hands without having to proxy or postal vote.

"It's important to me because it's the about the future of the country, a real chance for the country to give a democratic seal of approval to the EU."

Luc claims that stranded passengers were texted a code for money off a Burger King meal as compensation for the chaos which has affected flights across Europe.

Fellow student Emma Combes, who is due to start at the University of Bath in September, says she can't get back to the UK until Saturday after her easyJet flight from Madrid to Luton on Thursday afternoon was cancelled.

Emma claims the earliest flight she could get back free of charge wasn't until Monday so she has had to fork out an extra 190 Euros to get back on Saturday.

Emma, 18, from Bedford, who has been out in Spain on holiday with friends, told The Sun: "I was supposed to be flying home from Madrid to London Luton this afternoon, arriving back in enough time to vote this evening.

"I was informed yesterday that my flight has been cancelled due to the French air strikes meaning our plane is stuck in France.

"Now I am unable to get home until Saturday, and it is too late to register for a proxy vote."

The student says she is gutted because she wasn't old enough to vote in last year's general election and was "looking forward to being able to have [her] say this time".

Dozens of other travellers have taken to social media to voice their disgust at the cancellations and delays - many furious that they've been robbed of their right to vote by the strikes.

Dan Gourd posted on Twitter: "@David_Cameron @easyJet my easyJet flight from Marseille to Gatwick 2moro is cancelled so I cant vote on the EU referendum!! What can I do??"

Joel McConnell wrote: "I'm stuck in France can't get home to vote, flight cancelled cuz of air strikes."

Lesley B added: "My flight is cancelled & Wont be back for 10. I'm being told this isn't valid reason for a proxy vote. Doesn't sound right!! Anyone know?"

 

While Sarah Chivers asked: "@easyJet my flight home to the UK has been cancelled. What happens to my right to vote?"

One user, Conor Murphy, even asked if there was anyone who wasn't planning to vote before could go out and vote Remain for him.

Meanwhile Melville Pereira tweeted Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn: "@jeremycorbyn my flight back to UK has been cancelled cos our friends the French need a day off. How can I vote so we can still be friends?"

Some even commented on the irony that Ryanair was backing Vote Remain but due to cancellations by the airline they couldn't get back to vote at all.

Dianne Delahunty said: "@Ryanair sent me mail urging me to #VoteRemain - exactly what I wld have done except they cancelled my flight home so I can't vote at all."

In France footie fans are also stuck as they try to get home from seeing their teams play at Euro 2016.

Sunil Suri, who was due to fly back to Gatwick from a work conference in Barcelona this afternoon, is stuck in Spain after his flight was delayed.

The 25-year-old from London says he "deliberately picked an early flight" so he could make it back in time for the vote - even though he plans to head to Lyon tomorrow for Euro 2016.

Ryanair has yet to comment on the delays at Valencia - or the offer of the Burger King voucher - but

the Dublin-based airline's chief marketing officer, Kenny Jacobs, said: "These strikes by French ATC workers are becoming a weekly event by now, causing chaos for families wanting to take their summer breaks but also designed to upset the plans of football fans coming from far and wide to France to enjoy the Euros.

"It is simply unacceptable that this situation is allowed to persist, and we regret that once again we have been forced to cancel a number of flights due to the selfish actions of these workers."

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

 

