Hundreds of thousands of desperate travellers cram into London’s train stations as flooding causes travel chaos

2016-6-23

Commuters suffered a miserable journey home after London’s Waterloo station went into a state of gridlock - thanks to the weather.

Thousands of people struggled to travel home last night after a month’s worth of overnight rain caused widespread flooding in the capital early on Thursday.



All London tube lines affected by flooding have reopened although there are still delays across the capital's underground service

Rail operators including Southeastern, South West Trains and Greater Anglia are reporting major delays

The Gatwick Express train has a reduced service

Delays in Brixton following a smash between a bus and a fire engine

Waterloo Station has reopened after massive overcrowding subsided

Commuters were "strongly advised" to leave work early to avoid the predicted travel chaos on the roads and the railways.

South West Trains, whose services were hit by multiple delays yesterday morning, put queuing systems in place because of overcrowding.

Clapham Junction station in south London was flooded yesterday which has had a severe impact on services running through the station.

The operator said its engineers were working at several locations around the network to repair problems caused by thunder, lightning, and flash floods overnight.

They have also stated their services are delayed by up to 30 minutes and some journeys might be altered.

Train operator Southern earlier were "strongly advising" people to leave plenty of time for their journeys home from work.

In a statement on their website they confirmed they were running an "extremely limited" Gatwick Express service to and from London Victoria.

The company's services between Clapham Junction and Milton Keynes were suspended for the rest of the day.

Transport for London had to suspend some Underground services with many of the lines experiencing delays.

Commuters hoping to use the Bakerloo, Circle, Metropolitan, and District lines were hit with delays.

The Hammersmith and City line suffered minor delays, and the Transport for London Rail line and the London Overground lines was part suspended.

The adverse weather has also made it treacherous for some voters to reach polling stations as they brave the rain to vote in the EU referendum.

Yesterday morning the Met Office forecast thundery showers that would ease off during the day before returning in the afternoon.

Flooded roads across the south-east meant motorists faced potentially-dangerous journeys home, with some drivers finding themselves in deep water.

One car in Essex was pictured submerged in flowing brown water after appearing to have slipped of the road and fallen halfway down a bank.

The county had its worst floods in years on Thursday and by 7am Essex Fire Service had received over 200 calls.

Network Rail has confirmed that some mainline services will still be running this afternoon, but alterations and cancellations can be expected.

The rail operator has suspended journeys from London Victoria to Brighton for the rest of the day.

Trains from London Victoria to Epsom have also been suspended but some will still run via Mitcham Junction.

The operator also warned some trains from Charing Cross into Kent may be suspended.

People in London planning to get a cab home from work to avoid rail journeys may also face delays because of deluged roads.

An Uber driver was forced to drive his car through the flooded Blackwall Tunnel as water lapped up against the side of his vehicle.

Treacherous journeys home followed a night of powerful thunderstorms and flash flooding in the south-east of the UK.

There was major disruption to rail networks with South West Trains, Southern, and TFL Rail services all affected by delays.

Lightning was captured forking across the sky over Kent before experts warned a month's worth of rain would fall on London in just a few hours.

Thundery showers were contained to the south-east while the rest of the country enjoyed sunny spells and scattered showers.

The Met Office issued amber "be prepared" and yellow "be aware" warnings for London, the south-east, and the east of the country.

Yellow warnings were also in place in the East Midlands and the south-west.

Some school buses in Essex were delayed as pictures on social media showed a residential area of Barking under inches of flood water.

People preparing to fly abroad also had their travel plans jeopardised, as Gatwick Express southbound services were suspended because of "poor weather".

London Underground journeys were also delayed.

