Jo Cox’s killing hailed as ‘turning point’ towards a better future with vigils taking place around the world

2016-6-21

FALLEN MP Jo Cox was hailed by more than 1,500 politicians from around the world today who vowed the mum-of-two’s killing would be a “turning point” towards a better future.

Parliamentarians of 41 countries ranging from Albania to Zimbabwe signed a joint statement paying tribute to an “indefatigable and compassionate campaigner, mother and colleague”.

And they described themselves “shocked to the core at a violent attack on democracy and our values” after Mrs Cox was senselessly killed outside her constituency surgery last week.

The remarkable show of solidarity came ahead of a series of vigils taking place across the globe tomorrow to celebrate Jo’s life and beliefs on what would have been her 42nd birthday.

Today Mrs Cox’s husband Brendan urged “everyone and anyone who would like to remember Jo and what she stood for” to attend the events as he gave another heartbreaking glimpse into the personal toll of her murder.

In a Facebook post, Mr Cox wrote: “When I turned on my phone this morning a reminder popped up; ‘Jo to take Lejla to nursery’.

“It was supposed to be an introduction to the nursery that Lejla would start at in September.

“Jo had cleared her diary (despite the referendum) so she could be there all morning with her.

“Tomorrow would have been Jo’s 42nd birthday and Jo’s amazing friends have come together to organise a global celebration of her life and the causes she fought for.”

Lejla is the couple’s three-year-old daughter who watched along with brother Cuillin, five, and other family members as MPs paid moving tribute to their mum yesterday.

Family, friends and colleagues will lead the tributes by gathering to remember her at 4pm in Trafalgar Square tomorrow as part of the “More in Common” movement which has sprung up since the atrocity last Thursday.

Similar events are taking place at Glastonbury, New York, Sydney, Beirut, Buenos Aires, Brussels and many other locations as part of a “worldwide celebration” of the Labour MP and former humanitarian worker.

A memorial will also take place in her Yorkshire constituency of Batley and Spen as all the gatherings remember Jo’s “warmth, love, energy, passion, flair, Yorkshire heritage, and her belief in the humanity of every person in every place”.

The More in Common movement is named after a statement Mrs Cox made in her maiden speech as an MP last year, when she said: “We are far more united and have far more in common with each other than things that divide us.”

The line was also referenced in the joint letter from Parliamentarians, which read: “Last week, the life of UK MP Jo Cox was brutally and senselessly snatched away. As many have been, we are shocked to the core at a violent attack on democracy and our values.

“As human beings, we are devastated at the loss of an indefatigable and compassionate campaigner, mother and colleague. And as parliamentarians, we commit to ensuring her legacy is upheld.

“In her first speech to parliament, just one year ago, Jo said: “While we celebrate our diversity … we are far more united and have far more in common with each other than things that divide us.”

“Every elected representative should reflect on those words this week. Let this be a turning point for us all.

“Beyond politics and parties, we must as societies stand together to stem the poisonous rising tide of fear and hate that breeds division and extremism.

"We must follow Jo’s example to open our arms with love to our communities, our neighbours and those less fortunate than ourselves, and to celebrate our tolerance and diversity.”

And in a video released today more than 30 Labour MPs who joined parliament in 2015 alongside Jo Cox have paid tribute to their friend and colleague.

They call for people to reject the 'politics of hate' that led to her death.

Mrs Cox died after being shot and stabbed outside her constituency surgery on Thursday.

Alleged far-right sympathiser Thomas Mair has been charged with her murder.

