Carnage at Glastonbury Festival as MORE rain overnight turns mud bath into swamp… but it doesn’t stop everyone from having fun

2016-6-23

GLASTONBURY was already a mud bath before festival goers arrived yesterday, but as rain fell heavily overnight the ground is getting more flooded.

The fun continues however as happy, and muddy, people refuse to let the weather spoil the five-day bonanza of music, comedy, theatre and other arts.

Arriving yesterday, the 180,000 revellers had to battle through 25 hour long queues, mud and rain to secure a spot in the campsites.

Festival organisers had asked people not to arrive by car as it was reported two of the main car parks were closed, but by mid-afternoon the gates were fully thrown open again.

Despite the rain and mud - which, quite frankly, Glastonbury just would not be Glastonbury without - people at the festival continue to have fun regardless.

Although there was no official acts playing last night festival goers wasted no time by getting stuck into dancing and partying.

Some donned glow in the dark costumes, and others threw caution to the wind by whipping their tops off to embrace the hippy spirit the festival is famous for.

This morning as people wake up and emerged from their tents into the quagmire, the weather has been mostly dry at the Somerset site.

Fantastic to wake up inside Glastonbury!  Tent city with lots of cloud pic.twitter.com/nSzwl9Iu8Q

It is thought to improve from later on today, just in time for the big names performing on Friday.

Temperatures could rise to highs of 19 degrees celsius today, with the sun breaking through the current grey cloud covering.

Despite this promise of a change in weather, plenty of people who did not get tickets to the festival have taken to social media to declare how glad they are to be missing out on the mud and torrential rain.

If the weather does improve, the rain showers are unlikely to leave - the Met Office shows that the chance of thundery showers from Friday afternoon through to Saturday lunchtime are still high, with sunshine on Sunday.

However it looks like the mud is there to stay, as is tradition.

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368.

 

