‘Where do I vote?’ Could 175,000 festival-goers hold key to knife-edge EU Brexit vote… as revellers turn up expecting a polling station on site

2016-6-23

THE EU referendum is dominating conversations as more people than ever seem to be flocking to polling stations to cast their vote - however, people partying at Glastonbury were surprised to find out they will be unable to vote from the festival.

A large portion of the campers arrived on Wednesday and, despite urges from festival organisers to organise a postal vote or vote by proxy, many were still confused on the issue and still believed they would be able to vote from the Somerset site.

One mum tweeted Glastonbury Festival's official account asking for help for her son.

She said: "My son asked how to vote if you are at a festival - My answer is I don't know."

A swift reply informed her: "Unfortunately there are no polling stations on site this year."

One in the know camper, Briony Hugl, 24, said she was concerned that many festival-goers might not have voted.

She said: "I've heard lots of people talking about it and saying 'When I vote...' and I sort of think: 'Do you know that either you can't vote or you've missed your chance now?'.

"People may not have realised that they can't scoot back later on, or they haven't already done the postal vote. I've seen a lot of 'in' T-shirts.

"But I'm talking to a lot of undecided people, which perhaps suggest they haven't voted at all."

Linda said she was concerned that she would not be able to follow the election results as they come in on Thursday night.

She said: "That is so important for people, and there's nowhere obvious that we could go. I've been over to Left Field a couple of times and no one there seems to know.

"We want to know where we can watch it on television. I don't know where to go to - if it was on somewhere I would be there."

There has been concern potential non-voters at the festival could affect the result of the vote.

Nick Waters, 25, from south London, said: "There are a lot of younger people here who are more likely to want to vote In and some of those might not have got round to doing their postal votes, that might have a small impact.

"I want to be in because I feel that leaving is just a big risk to the economy which I don't think is necessarily worth taking.

"I don't think Europe is perfect but I don't think leaving is the answer when you can work from the inside."

He said his friend had applied for a postal ballot but had not received it in time to vote before the festival.

Friends Ross Parker and Tom Porter, both 27, from Wolverhampton, face the wrath of firm In voters on the coach to the festival as they had not managed to vote.

Tom said: "I would say the Glastonbury crowd in general, all the people on the coach - because we had a few beers and got into it on the coach - everyone is mainly in.

"And a lot of people we spoke to gave us a bollocking for not voting In, because we all didn't vote.

"Glastonbury will definitely knock it (the vote) because there's a lot of people here.

"I'd feel bad if we're Out - but what put me off is you're voting In, but you don't want to vote for David Cameron either, do you? I want to stay in but it will be a bit s***** whatever."

Although he had requested a postal vote Tom did not receive his form in time, but Ross forgot to register.

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368.

 

