‘I’m now even more confused!’ Katie Price takes part in live EU debate even though she’s never voted in her life

2016-6-22

KATIE Price has revealed that she is even more confused about which way to vote tomorrow - even though she’s never voted in her life.

The former glamour model was in the audience for tonight’s EU Referendum debate on Channel 4 and admitted she still hadn’t made up her mind.

Looking smart in a pink blazer and jeans with her hair pulled back, she listened to the views from both the Leave and Remain camps.

But when host Jeremy Paxman went over to get her opinion, she said she felt even more confused than before she arrived.

The 38-year-old mum-of-five said: “Believe it or not, I came here confused and I’m now even more confused.

“I’ve never voted before and I feel I’m pressured I have to vote this time. Lots of my friends are in, some are out and I’m asking them questions.

“My son’s got disabilities, so in my case I’m thinking what would be the best for his future, for the NHS, if he goes on holiday and he gets hurt there or something.

“There’s all of this. Do I think of myself and my family, or do I think about the country? I am just confused.”

Katie has never voted in an election in her life, but in the general election of 2001, she stood for parliament with the slogan “For a bigger and betta future”.

Price, who was 23 at the time, stood as an independent in the constituency of Stretford and Urmston in Greater Manchester.

Her main manifesto pledge was free plastic surgery for all but she also promised free package holidays on the NHS and tax cuts to people who had affairs with foreign footballers.

She said at the time:  "My policies are to make things fun. The election is boring. I'm here to spice things up."

Ever the optimist, she told the BBC: "I know it will take a big swing to win the seat but there's no bigger swinger than me."

She even placed a £5 bet on herself to win the seat, getting odds of 150-1 but she only received 713 and was beaten by Labour's Beverley Hughes.

Got a story? email digishowbiz@the-sun.co.uk or call us direct on 02077824220

