Ex Tory leaders and Chancellors accuse Treasury and Bank of England of colluding with PM on Project Fear

2016-6-16

EX Tory leaders and chancellors today accused the Treasury and the Bank of England of colluding with the PM and "peddling phoney forecasts" in a bid to scare voters into choosing to remain in the EU.

Former chancellors Lord Norman Lamont and Lord Nigel Lawson and ex-party leaders Iain Duncan Smith and Lord Michael Howard poured scorn on warnings of economic disaster from the Remain campaign.

But Prime Minister David Cameron said it is "deeply concerning" that senior Conservatives have criticised the "independent" Bank of England.

The four senior Tories also hit out at pro-Remain Tories for their behaviour in the referendum debate, describing Chancellor George Osborne's threat of an emergency Budget in the event of Brexit as "ludicrous scaremongering born of desperation".

Writing in the Daily Telegraph the pro-Brexit Tory grandees said: "There has been startling dishonesty in the economic debate, with a woeful failure on the part of the Bank of England, the Treasury and other official sources to present a fair and balanced analysis.

"They have been peddling phoney forecasts and scare stories to back up the attempts of David Cameron and George Osborne to frighten the electorate into voting Remain."

In the latest blue-on-blue row, the Prime Minister said voters should instead be listening to independent experts.

Mr Cameron tweeted:

1/2. It's deeply concerning that the Leave campaign is criticising the independent Bank of England.

2/2. We should listen to experts when they warn us of the dangers to our economy of leaving the European Union.

With a week to go until polling, the senior Conservatives insisted the UK's economy is strong enough to prosper outside the EU.

As well as outlining what they see as the problems of the single market, they claimed immigration is too high, and the UK would benefit from a "managed migration system".

Concluding the article, they said: "We can remain anchored to a declining economic power with a tottering currency, bound by all the EU's laws, with little influence. This master-servant relationship makes no sense for Britain.

"Alternatively, on June 23, we have a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to take back control of our economy and our country, to take advantage of the extraordinary potential of the world beyond the EU. We should grasp it with both hands."

Britain Stronger In Europe claimed the Leave campaign is ignoring expert economists because they are united in their warnings of damage to UK finances.

A spokesman said: "This is yet more fantasy economics from the Leave campaign.

"The reason they don't want to listen to economic experts is because they are all agreed that leaving the EU would wreck our economy and hammer family finances."

It comes as a spat between the Governor of the Bank of England Mark Carney  and a leading Vote Leave campaigner was made public.

The BBC has revealed senior Tory MP Bernard Jenkin wrote to Mr Carney warning him against making any "further public comment" about the EU referendum after the Governor predicted a recession if the UK votes to leave on June 23.

Mr Carney wrote back accusing the senior Tory MP of "a fundamental misunderstanding of central bank independence".

He wrote:"All of the public comments that I, or other Bank officials, have made regarding issues related to the referendum have been limited to factors that affect the Bank's statutory responsibilities and have been entirely consistent with our remits."

