MEP Daniel Hannan predicts dire future where ‘there is only decay and crippling poverty’ if we stay in the EU

2016-6-23

IT is 2026, and the European Federation is continuing on its slow, sulky decline.

The combined economies of its 32 states, which amounted to a hefty 31 per cent of the world’s economy as recently as 1980, now make up just eight per cent.

The euro has been in more or less constant crisis since 2008, and structural unemployment is a way of life.

A generation in southern Europe has known only poverty and emigration.

At first, these young people came to find work in Britain and the other northern EU states. But it wasn’t long before the euro crisis began to affect the whole continent.

As bailout after bailout was decreed, taxes began to rise across the EU. But no tax was enough to solve the problems of the single currency.

The euro staggers on, paid for by Britain, Germany and the Scandinavian states, inflicting ruin and misery on the Mediterranean.

The northern countries, including the UK, were forced to find this extra cash at the same time as receiving more settlers. The pressure on their schools, roads and hospitals grew. Life became more crowded, slower, tetchier.

We had our chance in June 2016 and blew it

At the same time, Eurocrats were determined to keep their border-free zone intact, however much it encouraged illegal immigration. Millions a year arrived in Spain, Italy, Greece and Poland, intent on going further.

Some of our brightest youngsters, by contrast, started leaving to work in countries less ­constrained by regulation.

The EU’s hostility to innovation is especially damaging to high-tech industries, such as medical research and software, and companies are relocating from Britain to Asia and North America.

The EU’s dislike of shale meant Britain couldn’t exploit the bonanza of cheap fuel under its soil. High energy costs and taxes closed what was left of our energy-intensive industries, such as steel, cement,
plastics and ceramics. Unemployment rose further.

The EU’s Ports Services Directive, brought in almost immediately after our referendum, hugely increased the costs of our commercial ports. More people lost their jobs.

But by then it was too late to do anything. We had had our chance in June 2016 and blew it.

It wasn’t long before we realised what we had done. In 2017, the euro crisis hit Italy and then France.

Suddenly, the disaster in Greece looked like a sideshow.

The EU was determined to keep the currency together, and the bailout fund was inadequate.

More money was needed, and it came through the EU budget, including from the states that had kept their currencies — Britain, Sweden and Denmark.

By then, no one in Britain was surprised. After the 2016 referendum, we were wearily accustomed to having to go along with whatever Brussels decreed.

At first, it was only the small things. The European Commission had held an especially convivial meeting on the morning of June 24 — Jean-Claude Juncker had insisted on champagne, though it was only 9am — to celebrate Britain’s “confirmation of her European commitment”.

Angela Merkel gave a delighted speech saying that, despite all the protests and complaints, it was clear most British people favoured deeper integration.

After all, she said, the scheme had been clearly laid out before the referendum.

The European Commission had publicly stated that it wanted economic, political and military amalgamation.

Within days, contentious legislation that had been put in storage before the vote was brought forth — restrictions on financial services, the ban on high-power electrical appliances, the import licensing rules that wiped out parts of London’s art market, the mid-term budget hike.

British ministers complained half-heartedly, but as the President of the European Parliament Martin

Schulz triumphantly put it: “This is what you voted for. You belong to Europe.”

Obsessed with their schemes for political merger, EU leaders were unable to cope with the economic crisis or the massive population flows into Europe, which made unemployment worse and lifted support for extremist parties, some on the fringe Left, some on the fringe Right.

What they had in common was a sense of rage. Voters could see they had lost control of the two things that were central to the function of government — money and borders. Europe, the place where democracy had been born, slid into populism and anger.

The rest of the world thought it sad, but was too busy making money to really care. As an over-regulated Europe fell ­further behind, Asia and the Americas surged ahead.

There are no European states at the G7. It now includes the US, China, Japan, Brazil, India, Canada and Korea (unified since the assassination of Kim Jong-un in 2020).

New technologies have transformed life in many developing states. Driverless cars, 3D printing, extraordinary advances in biotech. Only the EU — in hock to lobbies and vested interests, hostile to innovation, protectionist — has been left behind.

Even new members are regretting choice

Britons who want to know what life might have been like had they voted Leave ten years ago look wistfully at the other common-law, English-speaking democracies.

Countries such as New Zealand and Canada are booming, trading freely with the Asian giants and each other, prospering with managed economic immigration, encouraging innovation and start-ups.

Unsurprisingly, there is now significant emigration from Britain to there.

Plenty of people across Europe now denounce the Brussels racket. In northern Europe, the EU is associated with mass immigration. In the South, with mass unemployment. Everywhere, with a loss of control. Even the newest members, Albania, Bosnia, Montenegro and Serbia, are starting to regret their choice.

In Brussels, though, life is good. Eurocrats continue to enjoy their lavish, tax-free perks.

True, voters might not like what’s going on, but when did that ever stop them? Eurocrats have a long history of swatting aside inconvenient referendum results. Think of the way they responded to the French, Dutch, Danish and Irish “No” votes.

The only time they might have been halted was on June 23, 2016. For a brief moment, it looked as though

Europe might go in a different direction, based on democracy and national independence. But the moment passed. The opportunity was lost.

Now, there is only decay.

