Nigel Farage slammed for saying Brexit victory came ‘without a bullet being fired’

2016-6-24

UKIP leader Nigel Farage has been blasted this morning for claiming that Brexiteers had claimed victory 'without a single bullet being fired' - only a week after Remain supporter MP Jo Cox was gunned down in her constituency.

Farage made the comment, described by many as "insensitive", in his speech after the result of the EU referendum was delivered in the early hours of this morning.

Did Farage actually claim that not a bullet was fired? Did he really just say that?

Very bad taste of Nigel Farage to claim victory "without a single bullet being fired" after the campaign shooting of Jo Cox

"Without a single bullet being fired," Farage says. We have become disgusting.

Some voters accused the UKIP leader of having a "very short memory" and called the remark "disgusting".

Labour MP Jo Cox was killed after being shot and stabbed in Birstall last Thursday. Her death sent shock waves around the world and saw hundreds of people leave floral tributes in her constituency and in London in her memory.

The mum-of-two, who was 41 when she died but was due to celebrate her 42nd birthday on Wednesday this week, had been in favour of Britain staying in the EU.

Her attacker is alleged to have shouted "Britain first" during the assault.

Hundreds of people have since taken to Twitter to condemn the UKIP leader's comments.

Patrick Harvie, leader of the Scottish Greens, wrote on Twitter: "Did Farage actually claim that not a bullet was fired? Did he really just say that?"

Journalist Kevin Macguire tweeted: "Very bad taste of Nigel Farage to claim victory "without a single bullet being fired" after the campaign shooting of Jo Cox."

Stuart Brennan wrote: "Did Farage really say "without a shot being fired" days after the death of Jo Cox? How do people listen to this abomination of a human?"

While Kate Louise Powell posted: "Farage saying "we've done it without a single bullet being fired" in clear reference to Jo Cox is tasteless/careless, but are we surprised?"

P Ray Murray added: "Not a bullet shot, @Nigel_Farage? Over Jo Cox's dead body. I dare you to say that to her husband and children."

Oscar Robinson added: "Farage has said 'We won it without a bullet being fired'. 8 days after the murder of Jo Cox. Disgusting."

Speaking shortly in central London at around 4.30am after it became clear that Vote Leave had clinched victory, taking 51 per cent of the vote, Farage said: "Dare to dream that the dawn is breaking on an independent United Kingdom.

"This, if the predictions now are right, this will be a victory for real people, a victory for ordinary people, a victory for decent people.

"We have fought against the multinationals, we have fought against the big merchant banks, we have fought against big politics, we have fought against lies, corruption and deceit.

"And today honesty, decency and belief in nation, I think now is going to win.

"And we will have done it without having to fight, without a single bullet being fired, we'd have done it by damned hard work on the ground."

Speaking after the result, Jo Cox's husband Brendan said the MP "would have remained optimistic" despite Britain voting to leave the union.

He tweeted: "Today Jo wld have remained optimistic and focussed on what she cld do to bring our country back together around our best values."

Charity director Brendan has previously said his wife was murdered because of her "very strong political views".

He said: "She was a politician and she had very strong political views and I believe she was killed because of those views.

"I think she died because of them, and she would want to stand up for those in death as much as she did in life."

We pay for your stories! Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

 

