Nigel Farage accuses David Cameron and Remain camp of ‘despicable’ attempt to link Jo Cox’s murder and EU referendum

2016-6-20

NIGEL Farage has accused David Cameron and the Remain campaign of a "despicable" attempt to link Jo Cox’s murder and the EU referendum.

The Ukip leader said the Prime Minister’s side were trying to "conflate" the motivations of the Labour MP's alleged killer with voters who want to leave the European Union.

The prominent Brexit-backer said the In camp were doing this because they are "scared witless" about the prospect of defeat on June 23.

Mr Farage also dismissed the defection to the Remain camp of former Conservative chair Baroness Warsi as a "Number 10 put-up job".

The ex-minister said had decided to change sides after seeing the Ukip boss unveil a poster about immigration which has been labelled ‘racist’.

Mr Farage was speaking as MPs gathered in Westminster ahead of Parliament being re-called to pay their respects to Mrs Cox.

He accused the Remain camp of trying to use the death of the MP, who was repeatedly shot and stabbed in her Batley and Spen constituency, for political advantage.

He told LBC: "I think there are Remain camp supporters out there who are using this to try to give the impression that this isolated horrific incident is somehow linked to arguments that have been made by myself or Michael Gove or anybody else in this campaign, and frankly that is wrong."

Mr Farage insisted he had said nothing "inciteful" during the campaign, adding: "What we are seeing here is the Prime Minister and the Remain campaign trying to conflate the actions of one crazed individual with the motives of half of Britain who think we should get back control of our borders and do it sensibly.”

Speaking on the radio phone-in he continued: "We have a Prime Minister and a Chancellor and other big political leaders in Britain who are scared witless.

“They thought they would win this referendum by a country mile.

“They know it's neck and neck, they know it's down to who turns out on the day to vote, and there is no level of denigration or false association that they will not stoop to, but I think people are intelligent enough to see through this sort of thing."

Mr Farage defended the controversial poster and its slogan “Breaking Point”, which was released hours before Mrs Cox's death.

He said: "If the timing of her murder and me putting out that poster has upset people, I'm sorry.

“That certainly wasn't the intention. The intention was to use that poster for a day to point out that the EU is a failed project in every sense."

But he described Lady Warsi's defection as "the biggest put-up job I've ever seen", saying she "never supported Britain leaving in the first place".

