Turkey fritterers

2016-6-21

IF Turkey joining the EU is a referendum “red herring”, how come the British people are paying £675million to bring it about?

If David Cameron and other leaders really intend to block the Turks’ accession for the foreseeable future, why is a vast amount of our money being wasted on it — and when can we have it back?

Imagine the thousands of doctors or nurses it could recruit, or the schools it could build.

Imagine how it might ease the burden on those areas already bearing the brunt of the uncontrolled influx of migrants . . . where pay is stagnant and public services buckling.

The Remain campaign is desperate to discredit the idea of almost 80 million Turkish citizens getting access to the EU because they know immigration could defeat them on Thursday.

But how can they still pretend it won’t happen? British civil servants are busily working in “a dedicated team . . . on projects to improve Turkey’s prospects of joining the EU”.

Mr Cameron has repeatedly backed the idea. In 2010 he wanted to “pave the road from Ankara to Brussels”.

We have already bought the tarmac.

And Remain’s denials make no allowance for Turkey having some leverage in the matter. Their President is already blackmailing Germany’s Angela Merkel into allowing them visa-free access to the Schengen area. What’s next?

Now, you may not be bothered if our immigration numbers rocket even higher. But bear in mind, if you do care, that the Remain camp believes you unkind, closed-minded and intolerant.

Any worries about immigration make you a bigot. Ask Gordon Brown.

After all their ludicrous scare stories of poverty and war, Remain now hope to portray the big vote as a simple choice between good and evil.

What an insult to the intelligence of voters, who recognise that these are complex issues. What a disgusting smear, too, on about half the country — including the friends, families and neighbours of many Remainers.

Remain attack Nigel Farage’s antics, and fair enough.

But there is nothing more instantly divisive than their own infantile, sanctimonious moralising.

 

ANYONE can have second thoughts over the Brexit debate. We don’t blame Baroness Warsi for that. What baffles us is why anyone cares.

She is an unelected Peer with form for jumping on bandwagons and performing 180-degree turns later.

Like millions, she seems to have sat on the fence, flirting with Leave. Now she’s finally come down on the other side.

So what? The suggestion that she is a coup for Remain is bonkers.

We doubt the Baroness will change any minds but her own.

