Lindsay Lohan is bizarrely live-tweeting the EU referendum results

2016-6-24

HOLLYWOOD star Lindsay Lohan has begged Brits to stay in the European Union in a series of bizarre tweets from the actress.

Outraged at Leave taking the lead, the Mean Girls star took a swipe at Boris Johnson, comparing him to US politician Sarah Palin as she live-tweeted the referendum results to her nine million followers.

Despite the polls closing hours ago, Lindsay asked Prime Minister David Cameron how she could convince voters to stay in the EU.

She then posted a link to an article which stated 'Ten reasons to vote Remain in the EU referendum".

She wrote the first tweet just as the results began to be declared at 1am this morning.
It read: “#besmart pay attention and work hard to buy @chanel #remain where’s Sunderland?”

In another tweet she wrote: “@BorisJohnson using your child’s graduation for CAMPAIGN? sounds like someone in USA who used a child out of wedlock for PR.... #Remain.”

Lindsay, 29, also wrote: “Good luck with the pound.. will take you about 15 years to get it back up #REMAIN instead.”

Embarassingly, she had to ask Twitter where Sunderland and Swindon are.

Fortunately the BBC were on hand to send her a map pointing out the locations of Swindon and Sunderland.
The Parent Trap star replied: “I love the #shetlands @BBCNews thank goodness we have pure hearted people our side #besmart #ShetlandsVSSunderland."
Leave took the lead as Britain went Brexit-mad today to defy torrential downpours and vote in the historic EU referendum.

The first results had the result on a knife-edge with Remain sneaking victory in Newcastle but there was a thumping victory for Out in Sunderland.

In Newcastle there were 65,404 votes for Remain, 50.7%, while 63,598 ballots were cast for Leave 49.3%of the total.

In neighbouring Sunderland though 61.3% voted for Brexit, with 82,394 votes cast to 51,930 for In.

And across the North East voters have backed Leave – with both Hartlepool, Stockton-on-Tees and Middlesborough showing big margins of victory for quitting Brussels.

But Remain took back the lead from Brexit after thumping wins in Scotland and London cancelled out early victories for Leave in the North East.

Soon after 2am a host of results came in for Remain, including big victories in Scotland, Oxford, and London boroughs Lambeth and Wandsworth

More than 30 million people streamed into polling booths to vote Leave or Remain today in the biggest turnout for a nationwide election for decades.

 

