Nigel Farage in passionate plea to non-voters to help make tomorrow Britain’s independence day

2016-6-22

NIGEL Farage has issued a passionate plea to the non-voters to come out and vote for the first time tomorrow to make it Britain’s independence day.

The Ukip leader said he knows his supporters will crawl over broken glass to get to the polling station to vote out of the EU.

But he wants all the people who have been talking about it in pubs, all the people who have never voted before, all the people he has met on the campaign trail to help take the country back.

Mr Farage said: “We can do better than this. Tomorrow we can vote for real change.

“Tomorrow we can vote to put control back in the hands of the people.

“We can vote to get control of our borders back.

“I want us to vote for Britain to become independent.

“I want us to become democratic.

“Vote with your heart, vote with your soul, then we can make tomorrow our independence day.”

In a final push for the Leave campaign he said people should not believe David Cameron when he says if Britain votes to remain in the EU then we will be able to reform it from the inside.

He said Margaret Thatcher did not manage to reform it and Tony Blair did not manage it, because he says reform in Brussels means moving ever closer to centralisation, not independent countries.

And in his speech in central London he said the Prime Minister told everyone he was going to get a good deal from Europe but got very little.

Pulling out his European passport for the last time in the long referendum campaign, he said we are part of a customs union, or more accurately a big business cartel.

“We do not even have a British passport anymore; we have a European Union one.

“Let’s stop pretending what this European project is.

“They have an anthem, they are building an army.

“They have a flag and at the end of the day tomorrow people have to make a decision about which flag is theirs.

“If this referendum tomorrow was about joining the EU I think we would overwhelmingly reject it.”

And he told the audience one of the lasting images for him was Bob Geldof shouting abuse at him on the Thames as he led a flotilla of fishing boats to Westminster.

He said the multi-millionaire former rockstar does not care about ordinary people.

The Ukip leader said the result would be tight but said: “I genuinely believe we’re going to win this.”

