Labour leader blamed for Brexit as he makes the extraordinary claim he’s now the man to lead Britain

2016-6-24

JEREMY Corbyn launched an extraordinary defence of his lacklustre pro-EU campaign  today as Remain campaigners rounded on the "spineless" Labour leader and blamed him for Brexit.

His allies moved swiftly to defend his efforts in the failed bid to persuade voters to choose Remain, despite Mr Corbyn's own admission his enthusiasm levels for the project were only "7/10".

LIVE UPDATES: For all the latest on the referendum results

In a leaked memo, his spin team said MPs should toe the line that Mr Corbyn "led from the front in this campaign" if questioned by the media despite making limited interventions in the Remain campaign.

The email to all Labour MPs also ordered them to suggest the hard-left leader is now "uniquely placed as a critical remainer" and that "Labour is the only party that can meet the challenge we now face".

The directive will only fuel more infighting in the Labour party, with  rumours circulated that one Labour MP would openly call for his resignation today.

Lib Dem leader Tim Farron, who had privately urged Mr Corbyn to step up his effort during the campaign, launched a searing attack on the Labour leader calling him "absolutely spineless" and had "let Britain down".

"When the call went out to Jeremy Corbyn, he refused to answer," he fumed.

Early this morning  former Labour leader Ed Miliband admitted there were “lessons to be learnt” and that ­supporters had a “sense of anger” over key issues such as immigration.

He also slammed his ­successor Mr Corbyn for showing a “degree of ambivalence” on the EU.

But Shadow Commons Leader Chris Bryant blamed Mr Miliband and told reporters: “I might go and punch him because he’s a tosspot and he left the party in the state it’s in.”

Shadow First Secretary of State Angela Eagle admitted: “We have not been able to get through to all of our supporters.”

It sparked a fresh revolt against Mr Corbyn at the end of a hapless campaign in which he said he was “no lover” of Brussels, despite campaigning for Remain.

Pro-Remain former minister Ian Lucas demanded a “big change in approach”, while backbencher Jamie Reed said the party has to “change ­fundamentally”.

Former leadership hopeful Liz Kendall tweeted: “May I humbly request no ‘this is a huge wake-up call’ comments.

“Some of us have been ‘awake’ for a little while . . . ”

Brexit-backing Kate Hoey suggested Labour could have permanently lost voters by ignoring their concerns.

May I humbly request no ‘this is a huge wake-up call’ comments. Some of us have been ‘awake’ for a little while

She said: “We will find thousands and thousands abandoning the Labour view on this because we’ve known for a long time that the Labour Party view on this is out of step with supporters.”

Shadow Home Secretary Andy Burnham, who lost out to Mr Corbyn in the leadership vote, vowed the party would listen to the protests.

He said: “We understand what you’re saying.”

Labour HQ was sent into meltdown three weeks ago when it emerged half of the party’s voters did not know where it stood on the issue – and four out 10 planned to vote Leave.

Leading the backlash, pro-Remain backbench MP Gavin Shuker said: “The leader went AWOL for months, and when he came back, he just couldn’t convince our longest-standing supporters because they think he’s out of touch with reality.

“The referendum has shown us the weaknesses, but they’d only be magnified at a general election.”

Fellow pro-Remain MP Wes Streeting said: “There was far too much confusion about where Labour stood and the messaging from Jeremy was far too inconsistent.

“Jeremy struck the right tone of being a reluctant remainer at the outset but under the spotlight of a national campaign he was not able to sustain that message.”

Copeland MP Jamie Reed said the referendum had shown up a “real division between the Labour Party in London and the Labour Party and its voters outside in what we used to refer to as traditional Labour heartlands”, adding: “We have no divine right to match the 9.3 million votes that we got at the last election.

“The response cannot be to put our fingers in our ears again.”

Pro-EU MP Stephen Kinnock called for a “root and branch review” of why so many Labour supporters backed Brexit to be completed by the party conference in September, adding: “Jeremy and the leadership need to play a central role in taking that forward.”

And Brexit-backing MP John Mann told Mr Corbyn to go out and knock on doors in working class areas – or face one electoral defeat after another.

The Bassetlaw MP said: “There is a huge disconnect between the party and its natural base of support and this referendum has highlighted that very starkly.

“It’s no good Jeremy doing set-piece speeches to hand-picked audiences and thinking that’s going to connect – it isn’t.

“He has got no choice but to go out and expose himself to working class opinion by knocking on doors in places like mine.

“If the Labour Party does not get into a proper dialogue with working class voters it cannot win elections.”

Plans for a leadership challenge against Mr Corbyn were put on hold earlier this year – but renewed anger over the EU campaign could trigger a fresh round of plotting.

Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

