Lowlights of the three-month EU referendum campaign that lasted a lifetime

2016-6-24

THE three months of official ­campaigning for the Referendum felt like they would never end.

During what seemed like a lifetime of childish political point-scoring, we have had to put up with cringeworthy photo opportunities and dodgy posters.

The EU debate has also given us rapping party leaders, Remain moggies and Jeremy ­Corbyn in a fur coat.

And every time we thought the EU Referendum couldn’t get more silly, it proved us wrong.

We’ve been befuddled by false figures and seen a Tory MP with a black eye, while ­neighbours — and even families — have fallen out during the increasingly bitter debates.

But now with all the votes in, we can finally sit back, breathe a sigh of relief and laugh at the absurdity of it all.

LIVE UPDATES: Click here for all the latest on the referendum results

Here we take a look at the lows and lows of the In and Out scrap.

SINGER Sir Bob Geldof was no fisherman’s friend as he fought a war of words on the River Thames in London with Nigel Farage’s anti-EU flotilla.

The Boomtown Rat wanted to stay on the sinking EU ship and made a rude salute to the Ukip leader and his Brexiteers.

THE Stronger in Europe’s attempt to attract the “yoof” vote instead attracted universal derision.

The video used words such as earnin’, shoppin’, ravin’ and chattin’.

But it was just simply condescendin’.

 

REMAIN go *rap.

Lib Dem leader Tim Farron deserved a red card for his rendition of footballer John Barnes’ rap from New Order’s World in Motion hit.

It was a dig at Brexiteer Michael Gove who had wrongly claimed the former Three Lions winger was on his side.

The street-wise Farron was pictured performing it while on his “In” campaign bus.

 

LILIAN Edwards tried to claw votes from Leave by posting #CatsAgainstBrexit.

Anti-EU MEP Daniel Hannan insisted there was a strong out feline.

PRIME Minister David Cameron seriously suggested that quitting the EU could result in World War Three.

This was the man who last year said he would back Brexit if he couldn’t secure a good deal in negotiations with Europe.

DAVID Cameron comes together with ex-Labour Culture Secretary Tessa Jowell to recreate the Beatles walk on the Abbey Road zebra crossing in London.

It’s more Wings than Fab Four.

FORMER Marks & Spencer boss Stuart Rose is the official Remain campaign’s chairman.

But he’s been about as visible as a pair of M&S socks after bungling by saying that wages would go up if Britain left the EU.

Brexit campaigners joked about starting a “missing persons” inquiry for him.

BREXIT: The Movie is available at a YouTube channel near you.

Imagine The Great Escape without the drama.

It’s blokes in suits on trains discussing EU laws about pillows.

Sleepy stuff.

VOTE Leave wanted Barack Obama to do one after the US President claimed that Britain would be at the “back of the queue” in any negotiations with his country if we quit the EU.

Furious Brexit campaigners accused him of “blackmailing” the Referendum voters.

EUROPHILE Eddie Izzard edges out contenders such as barking Brexiteer David Icke thanks to his desperate and unfunny appearance on Question Time when he tried in vain to bait Nigel Farage.

EU lovers painted a 15ft mural on a Bristol wall of Donald Trump and Boris Johnson snogging.

Probably not what the  Republican presidential hopeful meant as he said “build a wall”.

 

NO, not Glastonbury but Nigel Farage’s ill-fated BPop concert in Birmingham.

Only three-quarters of Bucks Fizz agreed to perform and Alesha Dixon, East 17, Sister Sledge and 5ive also pulled out after learning it was a political event.

It was eventually decided to pull the plug on it.

JEREMY Corbyn ditched his grey tracksuit and opted for a white fur coat in a failed attempt to be funny on the Channel 4 comedy show The Last Leg.

The Labour man is no fashion leader.

THE claim that Britain sends £350million to the EU every week was heavily disputed.

And thanks to the rebate our former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher once negotiated, the figure is only around£248million.

Still, that’s a huge amount of money.

BORIS Johnson announced his decision to back Brexit while saying: “I love Brussels.

“I used to live there.

“Fantastic city, wonderful place.”

Anyone who has visited the grey, crumbling capital of Belgium will know this can’t be true.

INTERNET images such as this have poked fun at Project Fear photos and claims about the disasters which will befall us  if we vote for Brexit.

THE former chairman of the Conservative Party, Baroness Warsi, said she diverted from the Leave route after deciding Michael Gove and Boris Johnson are “not the kind of people I’d get on a night bus with”.

However, the Leave camp hit back by saying they never knew Lady Warsi was a part of their campaign.

A WIT posted images of the disasters should we Brexit such as “food only in lozenge format”.

They joked the rewards to Remain will include “a friendly tortoise”.

BORIS Johnson couldn’t convince his dad Stanley, attention-seeking sister Rachel or brother Jo to back Brexit.

And Michael Gove’s father Ernest rubbished his son’s fishy tale the EU had wrecked his Aberdeen fishing business.

He said: “I just decided to call it a day and sold up.”

THIS accolade can only go to The Sun for delivering a giant Victoria sponge to EU luvvie Emma Thompson after her moan Britain was a “cake filled, misery laden, grey old island”.

BRISTOL City Council was told to pulp Referendum voting guide leaflets which pictured a pen hovering over the Remain box.

The Electoral Commission said it was investigating.

It claimed the guides, which the council had already sent to 47,000 homes, were “biased”.

EVEN Brexiteers such as Michael Gove couldn’t stomach Ukip’s anti-immigration poster of refugees trudging through Slovenia with the words “breaking point”.

It broke Leave unity.

Cruellest smear

A LOT of mud was thrown at former London Mayor Boris Johnson, with the worst being a false claim that his wife was the anonymous barrister caught having sex with another lawyer at Waterloo train station.

The smear was designed to derail Boris’s drive for us to quit the EU.

Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

