It’s not EU, it’s me… Europe is like a broken marriage and I’ll be voting to leave

2016-6-21

LET’S face it, for those still undecided on how to vote in the EU referendum tomorrow, the “facts and figures” being churned out by both sides have now become little more than white noise.

In. Out. In. Out. What’s it all about?

There are plenty of ditherers like me — one in eight to be precise. And with the polls showing Remain and Leave as pretty much neck and neck, the politicians know that we are the critical mass.

So, it’s time to s**t or get off the pot, as my old grandma used to say, and I will do so by way of an analogy.

If the EU was your husband or wife, what would you do?

Do you settle for a life of discontent simply because the uncertainty of going it alone scares you?

You’ve been together for 41 years and you still have strong feelings for them, but your gut instinct tells you it’s just not working. They seem remote, self-obsessed, unconcerned by your needs and wholly dismissive of your rich contribution to the relationship over the years.

They spend more money than they bring in, hold regular “everyone’s welcome” parties without consulting you or planning the catering or accommodation and generally dictate what you can and can’t do while blithely doing as they please without fear of sanction.

And when you try to sit down with them to explain how you hope relations might improve between you in the future, they practically laugh in your face.

OK, so they don’t beat you up or cheat on you with their pneumatic secretary, but is that enough to warrant spending the rest of your born days with a control freak who takes you for granted?

The dilemma is a simple one.

Do you settle for a life of discontent simply because the uncertainty of going it alone scares you?

I love Europe and always will. And my plans to one day semi-retire to France won’t change either

Or do you stop enabling the unsatisfactory status quo and walk away, giving the message loud and clear that you’re not a pushover and that any relationship in the future will be on your terms as well as theirs?

They might flounce off and put on a good show of having a fabulous time with their friends. That’s the risk you take with ultimatums.

However, given your strength of character, self-sufficient nature and go-getting spirit, it wouldn’t be the end of the world. But far more likely, chances are they’ll miss you terribly, realise the error of their ways and, after a few late night Pastis or Schnapps, pick up the phone to say they’ll change if it means getting you back.

Which is why, tomorrow I will be voting to leave the EU.

I love Europe and always will. And my plans to one day semi-retire to France won’t change either.

But I hope that a vote to leave will prove the catalyst for much-needed reform in Brussels, a move away from bloated centralisation and back towards a more democratic and flexible arrangement where we — and the other clearly dissatisfied EU countries just waiting to see what we do — are each in control of our own tiller but steering towards the common aim of a strong, remodelled “Europe”.

We will be in control of our own borders, set and follow our own laws and be in charge of our own purse strings.

We will free our business and manufacturing from excessive red tape, exercise good old common sense when necessary without it being bludgeoned at birth by over-zealous EU regulation and, best of all, hold politicians to account because there will be no more “Europe won’t let us do it”.

And yes, we will still be compassionate to those in need.

Vote Leave.


LAST week, I wrote the following about the cold-blooded killer who sauntered in to Pulse nightclub in Orlando and gunned down 49 innocent souls.

“Much as Omar Mateen would like us to think of him as a jihadi warrior, the more pedestrian truth is probably that he was just a deeply disturbed young man dissatisfied with his own life and suffering from mental health issues that tipped him over the edge.”

This week the name and claimed political allegiance may differ, but time will tell whether mental illness, rather than political fanaticism, was the driving force behind the senseless killing of MP Jo Cox.

Until then, let’s focus on the good it has highlighted among the majority of right-minded people in this country.

The constituents who knew her and openly wept for her, the complete strangers who have donated nearly £1million already to her favoured charities, her devastated loved ones, and Bernard Kenny, the brave pensioner stabbed by her attacker as he tried to help.

And of course, Jo herself.

A devoted wife and mother who worked tirelessly to juggle the demands of home with the work of being a proper, grassroots MP who cared deeply about her constituents and fought passionately on the local issues that affected them.

God rest her soul.

THIS week’s cover of Hello! magazine is a gorgeous photograph of proud parents Ronnie Wood and Sally Humphreys with their newborn baby girls.

Presumably it was taken with a fast shutter as both of the wee bairns are asleep at the same time.

Talking of which, both the Rolling Stone and his theatre producer wife have those slightly rictus grins that scream: “Can we get on with this so we can get some much-needed kip in before they wake up?”

THE Queen telling Prince William to “stand up” after he crouched to speak to his young son while on the Buckingham Palace balcony encapsulated perfectly their vastly differing styles.

William’s attitude is largely family first, duty second. But his far wiser grandmother knows that duty and, more importantly, knowing when to maintain a sense of occasion, has kept the royals where they are for centuries.

And that doing something so charmingly ordinary in view of millions of your subjects could puncture that vital mystique to the extent that by the time William and Kate come to the throne, the “monarchy” will be greatly diminished and they’ll be using cabs, not carriages.



THREE 12-year-old girls are now in a stable condition following at least two of them  fighting for their lives after reportedly taking three ecstasy pills each, nicknamed “teddy tablets”.

It’s not yet known if the girls were fully aware of what they were taking, but no doubt the truth will emerge once the police have completed their investigation.

As parents, we can never guarantee that our children remain safe at all times – all we can ever do is teach them about life’s dangers and hope that, where possible, they manage to avoid them.

But one undisputed fact from this story did leap out at me.

They fell ill while wandering round a Greater Manchester shopping centre at 10pm on  Saturday night.

Surely far too late for three such young and clearly naive girls to be out alone?

STAFF at a rental garage in Swindon found a buzzard stuck in a van’s front grille and dismantled the vehicle to get the injured bird out.

He had a dislocated leg and broken wing but is now recuperating at a rescue sanctuary.

A happier outcome, thankfully, than his birdy chum who clearly flew in to actress Anna Friel’s front grille at Ascot and stayed there.

THIS is former Strictly dancer Kristina Rihanoff leaving her baby shower party and reportedly “weeks” from giving birth.

Weeks?

Ye Gods. It looks more like mere seconds, poor love.

