Police called to polling station after woman lends other voters PEN amid conspiracy theory pencil marks could be erased

2016-6-23

CLAIMS of a massive election fraud erupted as the referendum was engulfed by Pencilgate.

Thousands of suspicious voters questioned why they were given a pencil to vote.

Many took to social media to ask if it was part of a vote-rigging scam to ensure Britain stayed in the EU.

Some even claimed MI5 was involved and urged other to take their own pens to polling booths so their crosses couldn't be erased and changed after they had handed their ballot papers in.

A PCSO arrived at one polling station after a volunteer made a 999 call to police alleging “threats and intimidating behaviour’.

It is believed to have been suggested a woman had been trying to influence the way people were voting but she insisted she was trying to lend them a pen.

Having spoken to the woman, the PCSO was satisfied that no action was needed.

 

And in Stockton, Lee Dyson sat outside his polling station lending pencils to people who want to vote.

The 36-year-old told Chronicle Live: “When I went in, it was just pencils and I thought ‘why? There’s no reason?’”

“I checked and found out you can use pens, so I decided to make sure other people knew that too by sitting outside today, handing them out.

“They didn’t like it when I first turned up. They tried to move me on, but then I was allowed to stay.

“A lot of people have brought their own pens because of what’s been on the internet, but a lot haven’t and were happy to get one to take in.”

It comes as the hashtag #usepens is still trending on Twitter with Brexit-backers encouraging people to take their own pens to polling booths, suspicious their vote could be rubbed out and changed if they do it with a pencil.

A YouGov poll released earlier this week revealed many Leave campaigners fear the referendum result will be rigged against them.

The survey found 46 per cent of all Leave voters think it's 'probably true' that their vote will be altered.

Everyone should #usepens on the ballot paper. #leave #brexit #IndependenceDay

Just been to #vote in the #EUreferendum good job I took a black pen. They supplied pencils!  #usepens

#usepens #UseYourVote #EURef #VoteLeave pic.twitter.com/RDPwuelonT

Out of the Ukippers surveyed, a third of them feared MI5 might be involved.



There is no law that states ballot papers have to be completed in pencil, but the Electoral Commission says they are used ‘partly for historic and partly for practical reasons’.

In a response to a Freedom of Information request made by voter Kenneth Priestley, on whatdotheyknow.com, a spokesman said: “In the UK, pencils are traditionally used for
the purposes of marking ballot papers and are made available inside polling stations for voters to use.

“Having said this, there is nothing to stop a voter from using a pen to mark their vote – there is no legal requirement for ballot papers to be marked with a pencil.

“Pencils have been used partly for historic and partly for practical reasons.”

Mr Priestley had asked why pencils were not replaced with black pens to avoid potential fraud and the Electoral Commission said: “The use of pencils does not in itself increase the likelihood of electoral fraud: while pencil marks can be rubbed out, similarly, pen marks can be crossed out.

“What is key is that the integrity of the process from the point that a voter marks their ballot paper to the declaration of the result is maintained.

“To this end, the legislation has built specific safeguards into the process, such as the requirement for seals to be attached to ballot boxes at the close of poll.”

The bringing of pens to poll stations has caused some Remainers to mock the Brexiteers, including scientist Brian Cox

I voted in pencil just in case MI5 need to change it later

 

 

#Usepens ??? // Please make your 'X' on the ballot paper using macaroni and glue; pen can be tippexed.#VoteRemain pic.twitter.com/ruWK3qLj0F

I'm using two pieces of spaghetti and some glue to mark my ballot paper. Pen can be tippexed. #usepens

The Electoral Commission has done its best to reassure voters that using a pencil will not affect their vote, but said people can use pens if they wish.

A spokesman said: “By tradition, pencils are available in polling booths for voters to mark their ballot papers.

“If a voter wishes to bring their own pen and use that, it's fine.

“In regards to security, at the count there are statutory observers to make sure that they are carried out correctly.

“Campaigners are also invited to observe the counts taking place.”

 

