Boris Johnson needs police protection after angry mob chant ‘scum, scum, scum’ outside his home

2016-6-24

BORIS Johnson is the bookies favourite to be the next Prime Minister but the popular political figure needed police protection to get out of his house this morning.

He emerged from his house to angry chants of "scum, scum, scum" from onlookers.

Former Mayor of London Boris Johnson just walked past the waiting reporters without saying anything about the EU referendum result

Police officers linked arms to prevent people from getting close to Boris Johnson's car

His efforts to say "good morning" were drowned out by the heckles and jeers as he made his way to the waiting cab in a blaze of camera flashes, followed closely by an aide.

Police officers struggled to keep crowds at bay as onlookers surrounded the car, slowing its departure.

By the time Mr Johnson had left, a crowd of around 100 people, as well as dozens of members of the world's media, had gathered in the street.

A steady stream of commuters cycled past throughout the morning, some shouting insults and jeering.

The prominent Brexiteer is now at Vote Leave headquarters where he will be holding a press conference, believed to be with fellow campaigners Michael Gove and Gisela Stuart.

Sky News reports Vote Leave was so sure it was going to lose the referendum that it had cancelled the celebratory party.

This is now definitely back on.

It comes after David Cameron made a speech at No10 earlier today announcing he was standing down as Prime Minister.

Bookies are now taking bets about who will replace David Cameron as the next Prime Minister.

The bookmakers have Boris Johnson as the favourite to be the next PM (4/5) ahead of Theresa May (5/2) and Michael Gove (5/1).

Very longshots on Paddy Power are Tony Blair on 100/1 and the Lib Dem leader Tim Farron on 200/1.

Anyone who wants to have a punt on Jeremy Corbyn can get odds of 16/1.

David Cameron revealed in an emotional statement outside Downing Street he wanted a new leader to be in place by this autumn’s Conservative conference.

He said: "I do not think it would be right for me to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination."

Mr Cameron’s remarks came just minutes after the markets opened with carnage in the City of London.

More than £100 billion was wiped off the FTSE 100 as the index fell more than 7%, while the pound also crashed 8% against the US dollar.

The announcement came after a historic decision this morning for a Brexit, with the electorate quitting the EU by 52% to 48%.

Mr Cameron said he accepted the outcome, which has left the country split in half.

While most of England and Wales chose to Leave the EU, voters in Scotland and London overwhelmingly backed Remain.

A massive popular uprising against the capital's elites was credited for the extraordinary result - which defied almost every expert prediction.

Huge swathes of the North, the East coast, the Midlands and rural areas across the south, all backed Out.

The final result saw 17,759,184 Brits vote to leave, while 16,580,508 backed remain.

The shock decision plunged the financial markets into unprecedented chaos, with the pound plummeting by almost 10% across the night - a 31 year low,

But a jubilant Ukip boss Nigel Farage declared: “Let June 23 go down in our history as our independence day.”

All eyes are now trained on Boris Johnson with the former Mayor of London tipped to be the next Conservative leader.

The Brexit-backing former London Mayor is as short as evens with bookmakers to succeed his old friend and longtime rival as PM.

