EU referendum poll shows Out campaign is surging ahead with a week to go

2016-6-16

BREXITEERS have surged into a six-point lead with exactly a week to go before the EU referendum, polls reveals today.

According to a survey by Ipsos MORI 53 per cent now want to leave the EU and 47 per cent want to stay, excluding don’t knows.

And in a poll by Survation and IG, the Leave camp has increased its lead by seven points, from 38 per cent, and Remain fell by two points to 42 per cent.

This is the first time since David Cameron pledged the referendum in January 2013 that the Leave campaign has come out ahead of Remain in the monthly telephone poll by Ipsos MORI.

And it is also the first time since Survation began polling in February that Remain has been behind.

Immigration is now the most important issue for people when deciding how the public will vote, overtaking issues around the economy, according to Ipsos MORI.

Its' survey reveals voters do not trust politicians on both sides, but especially the so-called Project Fear by the Prime Minister and Chancellor George Osborne.

Of the people surveyed, only 17 per cent of people believe the Chancellor’s claim that British households will lose £4,300 and be permanently poorer after a Brexit, with some 70 per cent thinking it has been made up.

 

More people think they will be better off in five years if Britain leaves the EU than stays in.

This is despite Government warnings of people losing their jobs and having lower incomes if Britain votes for Brexit.

When asked what was the most important issue for them, 33 per cent of people said immigration.

This is up five points in a month.

And it is the biggest issue for Leave supporters with 52 per cent of them listing it as very important to their vote.

The economy has dropped down five points to 28 per cent, making it second place in the league table of important issues.

Forty-one per cent of people who back Remain say the economy is a very important factor in deciding how to vote.

David Cameron is coming off worst in the battle of trying to convince voters with Ipsos MORI finding there is greater scepticism about what the Remain campaign is saying.

When he spoke about six ‘complete untruths’ he says Vote Leave is claiming will happen if Britain stays in the EU, like being liable for future Eurozone bailouts, people still believed the Leave campaign.

Pollsters found 48 per cent thought the bailout claim was true and just 40 per cent thought it was false.

Voters are split 45-45 on the claim that Turkey will be fast-tracked to becoming a member of the European Union.

But Nigel Farage’s claim there would be a higher risk of sex attacks by migrants if we stay in the EU is not believed.

Only 28 per cent thought it true and 62 per cent said it was false.

According to the poll for Evening Standard only 19 per cent think politicians from both leave and remain are mostly telling the truth during the campaign.

More than twice as many, 46 per cent, think politicians are mostly telling lies.

Gideon Skinner, head of political research at Ipsos MORI, told Evening Standard: “The Leave campaign is getting their messages across, especially on the key public concern on immigration.

"But the Remain camp is finding it much harder to convince people that their core economic messages, both on the risks of Brexit and the benefits of staying, is going to have a personal impact on their lives.”

