The EU is kaput … It’s time to make a dash for the Emergency Brexit

2016-6-19

IF the history of our country tells us anything, it is surely that the British can never be bullied into submission.

Luftwaffe bombs couldn’t do it. The IRA couldn’t do it. Islamic State can’t do it.

So what hope did a couple of trust fund toffs like David Cameron and George Osborne ever have of scaring us?

The Prime Minister and the Chancellor — the two-faced champion and chief cheerleader of the Remain campaign — have given us no positive reasons to vote to stay in the European Union.

Instead of any hopeful, optimistic message, they have attempted to browbeat, intimidate and frighten the British people.

Osborne’s threat to respond to Brexit with savage cuts and punitive tax rises is only the latest example of their bullying.

The fact that George never says he will have to cut the bloated foreign aid budget reveals the pathetic emptiness of his threats.

Even in the midst of economic meltdown, there will still be that £12billion a year to buy private jets and London mansions for Third World despots!

Who can blame the other countries of Europe from wanting to obliterate their miserable histories?


Cameron, Osborne and their Remain allies talk about our country as if it is a timid, self-loathing and pitiful little nation that would shrivel and die outside the EU.

This is garbage.

There are 195 countries in the world and only 28 of them are in the European Union.

If the likes of Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Tonga can be proud, independent, self-governing nations, then why can’t we?

Cameron, Osborne, Gordon Brown, Tony Blair, William Hague and all the rest of Remain’s miserable shower of yesterday’s men have continually talked this country down.

From the beginning to the end of this referendum campaign, they have spoken about our country as if it is incapable of surviving outside the EU.

And millions of us simply do not believe them.

We KNOW that our country is better than they give it credit for.

We are the fifth largest economy in the world.

We are the oldest Parliamentary democracy on the planet.

We are a cultural superpower.

London can reasonably claim to be the capital of the world.

And unlike almost every other nation in the European Union, we have a past that we are proud of.

Who can blame the other countries of Europe from wanting to obliterate their miserable histories?

The story of modern Europe is a tragic litany of Fascism, Communism and foreign occupation.

If the British have always felt slightly apart from these troubled lands, it is because we never needed anyone to set us free.

The Prime Minister constantly lied to the British people. It is worse than spin. It is worse than slippery political language

This EU referendum has not been our democracy’s finest hour.

I am one of the 11 million suckers who voted for Cameron at the General Election — and gave him that unexpected victory — because when he looked the British people in the eye and swore us he would get a new deal for our country in the European Union, I did not doubt him for one second.

Cameron had always acted as if he detested the undemocratic, corrupt EU as much as the rest of us.

Certainly the stinking hypocrite always bashed Brussels when he wanted a standing ovation at the Tory party conference.

He unequivocally stated that, inside or outside the European Union, our nation would succeed.

As recently as last November, Cameron said: “No one doubts that Britain is a proud, successful, thriving country. Whether we could be successful outside the EU — that’s not the question.”

But the Prime Minister constantly lied to the British people.

It is worse than spin. It is worse than slippery political language.

No ifs, no buts — Cameron lied.

He lied when he said he would reduce immigration to the “tens of thousands”.

He lied again when he vowed he would fight for a new deal for Britain inside the EU — or lead the campaign to leave.

And — so soon after assuring us that we could “thrive” outside the EU — he is lying to us now with his dark warnings of national collapse if we dare to claim our country back.

But this referendum is not about the Prime Minister.

And it is not about the leadership of the Conservative Party.

It is about the destiny of our country.

Only one continent on the planet has weaker economic growth than Europe — Antarctica


Do we really want to remain part of the European Union when it so obviously is not working?
The currency is kaput. The borders are kaput.

The immigration policy is a bloody shambles, encouraging the rise of vicious extremists across Europe and ripping at social cohesion by importing alien cultures.

Yet even as the EU falls apart, it dreams of expanding, sucking in poor countries like Serbia, Montenegro and Turkey.

Despite its delusions of grandeur, the EU’s share of the world economy is in sharp decline.

Only one continent on the planet has weaker economic growth than Europe — Antarctica.

The European Union is a 20th century idea that has had its day.

All empires eventually slip into the mists of history.

Why should the EU — with its mad dream of a United States of Europe, repellent to millions of us — be any different?

The EU claims to drive prosperity and peace.

But this waning empire makes nobody prosperous and nobody safe.

Prosperous? Monetary union — the Euro — has been a disaster.

In the 19 member states that have adopted the Euro, there are 16.4 million unemployed — many of them driven into exile to the UK.

Unable to escape the straitjacket of the Euro, proud countries like Greece, Spain and Italy find they are the paupers of the western world.

All the eye-swivelling EU groupies urging us to stay once predicted the UK was doomed if we did not ditch the pound.

They were laughably wrong. The Euro does not work and it will never work.

So does the EU keep us safe?

Last year there were two terrorist atrocities in the centre of Paris, enabled by the absence of borders between France and Belgium.

When Turkey joins the EU — and Cameron has actively supported Turkish membership — the EU will share a common external border with Syria, Iran and Iraq.

That will make us nice and safe.

The EU’s porous borders do not work in an age of Islamic terror.

When German Chancellor Angela Merkel took the unilateral decision to welcome more than one million Muslims to her country in 2015, the silly old Frau laid out the welcome mat to the Third World, changing Europe’s culture forever with her insanely reckless gesture.

Because when these newcomers receive their shiny new EU passports, they are free — like the other 508 million citizens of the EU, to live in the UK.

For the EU is built on what is called the four freedoms — the freedom of movement of capitals, goods, services and people. Like it or lump it.

The reason the freedom of movement can never work for the British is because so many millions around this unhappy little planet desperately want to live here.

This has nothing to do with anyone’s race, religion or creed — it has everything to do with numbers.

No nation of earth can accommodate literally limitless numbers of newcomers.

Yet that is what the EU compels the UK to do.

And as long as we stay in the European Union, our control over immigration from other member states is non-existent.

That is why the Remain camp is so loathe to even mention immigration — and why they are so quick to shriek “Racist!” at anyone who does.

They know that while we stay in the EU, we cannot do the one thing that every nation should do — control our own borders.

The EU does not care how hard it is for you to find a home, or if your child cannot get into the local school or if your GP can’t see you this week, or if there is no hospital bed for your elderly parent, or if the crush on your morning commute recalls the black hole of Calcutta.

Your quality of life means nothing to the unelected Eurocrats of Brussels, who have no love or loyalty for this nation, and no affection for our people, and no respect for our history and traditions.

It beggars belief that this proud island — where no foreign invader landed for a thousand years — could meekly surrender its independence to the EU, the freedom that other generations fought and died for.

So when I place my vote on Thursday, I shall think of my father, Victor William Robert Parsons, who fought for his country as a Royal Naval Commando in World War Two and came home with a Distinguished Service Medal and a body that was a mass of scar tissue.

I will remember my father because our country’s freedom — its right to be proud, independent and self-governing — is held in trust for future generations.

Nobody has the right to give that freedom away. And that is why I would crawl across broken glass to vote Leave on Thursday.

Do you have a story for The Sun Online news team? Email us at tips@the-sun.co.uk or call 0207 782 4368

