Labour MP faces backlash after appearing to link ‘dangerous material’ from campaign to Leave the EU to murder of Jo Cox

2016-6-17

A LABOUR MP is facing a backlash after appearing to link the “dangerous material” from the campaign to leave the EU with the murder of Jo Cox.

He has been accused of trying to politicise the tragic murder of his colleague after saying the Brexiteers risk “inspiring the hard-right”.

The MP for Bermondsey and Southwark appeared on Newsnight just hours after Mrs Cox was shot and stabbed to death to criticise Ukip's new poster depicting migrants.

He also appeared to suggest the attacker who ambushed the MP for Batley and Spen outside a West Yorkshire library may have been politically motivated.

The 41-year-old married mother-of-two was shot three times - once in the head - and stabbed repeatedly outside her constituency surgery yesterday afternoon, and died a short time afterwards.

It has been claimed her attacker shouted 'Britain first' as he carried out the attack.

One of the witnesses who initially claim they heard the remark has since denied it.

A 52-year-old man, named locally as Tommy Mair, has been arrested in connection with the incident and is in custody.

Both sides in the EU referendum fight have agreed to suspend campaigning with just days to go until the June 23 vote.

Appearing on the BBC2 show last night, Mr Coyle said the Leave campaign should be “careful” about the material it has been putting out.

He said: “I think that the kind of nonsense that they inspire online from anonymous accounts and actually the core content of the poster they launched today, look at what they are putting out and I just think that they are a very dangerous, and they risk inspiring extremist elements on the hard right in this country.”

He also referred to a new poster unveiled by Nigel Farage, depicting thousands of male refugees flooding into Europe.

Within hours it was branded 'fundamentally racist', and has since been reported to the police.

But many have criticised Mr Coyle for his comments, accusing him of politicising Mrs Cox's death.

On Twitter Kev O'Connell wrote: “This Neil Coyle is a disgusting cheap nasty spin merchant just hours after her murder.”

Paul Butler added: “As soon as I think MP's can't go any lower they surprise me again.

“Political gain on the back of a colleague's death.”

And Christopher Christie said: 'A tragic event that transcends politics. MPs shamelessly exploiting this outrage for political expediency should be deselected.'

Meanwhile Phil Kitch wrote: “Shameful @coyleneil. Very inappropriate to exploit death of an MP to make political capital. Disgusting.”

But others praised his appearance just hours after his friend and colleague’s death, saying he made a “moving tribute”.

Lit Chick wrote: “We are all in shock and tears tonight. Thank you @coyleneil for keeping Southwark lovely. #ThankYourMP.”

