The Remain movement has turned the murder of Jo Cox into a moral crusade in run-up to refendum

2016-6-20

AFTER one of Britain’s darkest hours we hoped that politicians on both sides of the EU referendum would stick to debating the issues.

Instead, since the senseless murder of Jo Cox there’s been a conscious and deplorable move by some in the Remain camp to turn the vote into a moral ­crusade.

We are now told it’s wrong to raise ­concerns about immigration, shameful to attack the EU, and divisive to vote Leave.

This cynical campaign seeks to exploit a nation still mourning a much-loved MP and is beneath the politicians and activists supporting the Remain cause.

On Thursday voters have to make a momentous decision.

The Sun backs leaving the EU — partly because it’s a bloated, undemocratic and ruinously expensive political relic.

But also because we want MPs to regain control over Britain’s borders, so they can get a grip on the spiralling rate of immigration putting such strain on wages, jobs, schools and hospitals.

Labelling these legitimate concerns — held by millions of Brits — immoral not only cheapens the Remain campaign, it shows they have no answer to the ­question of how we manage who comes into the country.

We acknowledge that some on the fringes of this debate have unjustly ­targeted migrants for crude political advantage.

But the vast majority of people who will vote Leave this week want a kind, caring, inclusive society — yet face unfair accusations of bigotry and ­intolerance from Remainers.

In her maiden speech, Jo Cox told Parliament that Brits were “far more united and have far more in common with each other than things that divide us”.

It’s a message those on the Remain side should bear in mind over the final three days of the campaign.

THE Sun doesn’t see eye-to-eye with ­Jeremy Corbyn on most things, but we do admire his honesty.

So when the calamitous Labour leader says it’s impossible to put an “upper limit” on EU immigration, you know he’s telling the truth.

Sadly, while aware of the problem, Corbyn ignores the millions of Labour voters worried about the impact our open borders have on stretched public services.

Instead he blames the ­Government’s austerity programme, which has helped Britain prosper while much of Europe struggles.

Despite that, it’s welcome to finally hear some honesty on immigration from the In camp.

But, like gaffe-prone Remain chief Lord Rose — who admitted wages would rise on Brexit — we suspect Corbyn will now be gagged until June 24.

