WWII vets plead with Brits ‘don’t give away what we fought for’ urging voters to back Brexit

2016-6-20

WORLD War Two veterans yesterday begged the people of Britain to back Brexit – claiming the PM was “misleading” the British people to keep us in the EU.

The five heroes blasted the EU as anti-democratic and said they had “served the country on land, sea and air to ensure that future generations could be free and independent”.

Meeting the vets at a Berkshire airfield yesterday, Brexit backing Minister Priti Patel said she was “honoured”.

“These people fought for our country, and on Thursday we need to vote for our democracy,” she said.

“Defence of the realm is one of Government’s most basic duties.”

She added: “The prospect of having our security policy dictated by Brussels is a huge concern – and makes a mockery of the claim that Britain is stronger in the EU.”

Among the former serviceman Ms Patel met at White Waltham Airfield was 91-year-old Bryan Neely, who served in the RAF and remembered making Molotov cocktails at school in case of a Nazi invasion during the Second World War.

“They thought we were on our backs at Dunkirk and they were wrong then. We went on to save Europe, and now we can save Europe again,” he said.

Former Royal Engineer Colin Ashford insisted too much power had been given to Brussels: “We have seen a steady erosion of our democracy.”

The 97-year-old was a veteran of Dunkirk, North Africa and Italy.

He was joined by Flying Officer Bryan Neely, Lieutenant Tony Banks and Lieutenant Francis Goode.

Their letter reads: “We never imagined 71 years ago that our country would be in this position.”

“60 per cent of our laws are now made by faceless Brussels bureaucrats who are unelected, and the expanding EU military tells us that this is far more than just a trade bloc.

“Before you the British People cast your vote in the referendum on Thursday, we want you to know, that’s not what we fought for!”

They added: “Can you imagine how upsetting it is to us veterans that today we see our own politicians, and indeed our own Prime Minister, misleading the British people to keep us in the European Union?

“The EU is not democratic, and indeed the whole of Europe which we liberated together with our Allies during the Second World War, needs to know that.”

They told voters: “We plead with you. Please don’t give away everything we fought for. Please give your vote to our great country on Thursday.”

The letter was organised by the Veterans for Britain which is part of the official Vote Leave campaign.

They have previously warned that UK could be on the path towards an EU army, if we vote to stay in the EU on Thursday.

More than 270 Brexit-backing former military officers recently used a letter to The Sun to tell serving heroes to make sure they have a say in the EU referendum – and vote Leave to save Britain.

