Jeremy Corbyn: Vote of no confidence in Labour leader

2016-06-24

The vote for Brexit has cast a dark shadow over Labour party leader Jeremy Corbyn, who is now being called upon to reconsider his position. Two Labour MPs say they have already submitted a vote of no confidence in Mr Corbyn.

The motion by MPs Margaret Hodge and Ann Coffey means the subject will be discussed at the Parliamentary Labour Party on Monday, the BBC reports.

Mr Corbyn, who in the past held a Eurosceptic position, was already in the firing line on Friday by party members who felt his campaigning in support of Remain lacked passion and commitment. They dubbed it “lukewarm” and accused him of failing to appeal to core Labour voters.

“He really ought to consider his position”

Angela Smith

Labour MP Angela Smith said the leader needed to “bear his share of the responsibility for the way in which he led the EU referendum campaign from a Labour perspective”.

“He really ought to consider his position,” she said.

“If you are helping to lead the campaign for continued membership of the European Union then it’s clearly not acceptable to say you only support the EU on a scale of seven out of 10.”

Mr Corbyn’s leadership was also questioned by former Labour minister and EU commissioner Lord Mandelson.

He said he did not believe Mr Corbyn would be able to “cut it” as leader of the party in the next election

Earlier, Mr Corbyn said:

“A lot of the message that has come back from this is that many communities are fed up with cuts, they are fed up with economic dislocation and feel very angry at the way they have been betrayed and marginalised by successive governments in very poor areas of the country.

“The point I was making was there were good things that had come from Europe in working conditions and environmental protections but there were other issues that had not been addressed properly.”

Rochdale MP and Remain supporter Simon Danczuk said: “This referendum has been a vote about Europe, but it’s been a vote about immigration, about the public, particularly in the North of England, being disconnected from the mainstream political parties.

“Labour had to deliver some of the remain votes from their core Labour voters and we just failed to do that.

“They just do not listen to what Jeremy Corbyn has to say. They might think he’s principled, they might admire him, but they don’t listen to what he has to say.

“And that has meant that Labour has not got its message across. These strong Labour voters who voted time and time again for many, many years, they’ve become increasingly disillusioned with Labour. Now swathes across the North of England have done something that will disconnect them from Labour for a considerable amount of time.

“We will have to have a change in direction in terms of the Party. If the public didn’t vote for Ed Miliband, I’m sure as heck they are not going to vote for Jeremy Corbyn because he is further to the left of Ed. Anybody who thinks the public out there want some far-left Prime Minster need to think again.”

Asked by i if he felt Mr Corbyn should his reconsider his own position as leader of the Party, Mr Danczuk said: “I’m not being disrespectful to Jeremy. The truth is he just doesn’t connect with the electorate. He doesn’t speak their language, he can’t relate to them. It’s just not helpful.”

