Here’s what Boris must aim for now

2016-06-24

What an astonishing day, after a campaign of extraordinary fractiousness. Of course everyone now has an even more urgent need to know what the Out plan looks like, since it was never completely clear from Vote Leave’s rather dreadful campaign.

And yes, even though they won, it was a dreadful campaign. They were simply fortunate in that the Remain campaign was even worse.

So what can we realistically expect now? There are several key questions to answer:

Firstly, we did not elect Vote Leave. This was not like a general election where a party sets out their manifesto, we then vote on it, and they then move into government and implement it. No, Vote Leave was simply a campaigning group which was trying to get a Leave vote. That remains true if Boris Johnson now becomes prime minister and Michael Gove chancellor. We were solely voting to give the elected Conservative government of the day and the House of Commons a mandate to continue with EU membership or to give it up.

As of yesterday, the EU issue moves back into the Commons and becomes subject to all the usual party arithmetic. The key points being that the governing party has a small majority and is mostly made up of MPs who voted Remain. The Commons as a whole is even more in favour of Remain – about 75 per cent of MPs.

The challenge is to find a way of ditching our EU membership that does not cause serious disruption to trade, and maintains the good bits of the relationship. In particular, the UK must now negotiate the trade-off between high levels of single market access and free movement.

For an economy as heavily integrated as Britain’s, one can’t easily have one and not the other. On this, the Remain campaign was very close to the truth. That, allied to uncertainty in markets after the Leave vote, means the Government will have to prioritise addressing the economy over doing anything drastic on EU migration. Nigel Farage and his more noisy followers are likely to be disappointed.

Put all that together and it is likely that we will follow a very pragmatic or “liberal leave” process. And so we should. This takes Brexit as a multi-stage process that firstly sees Britain exit EU membership while maintaining single market participation. Such a halfway-house would put us in the European Economic Area (EEA), like Iceland or Norway. That lessens the economic risks of exit yet also repatriates big powers over agriculture, fisheries, and VAT, while at the same time giving the British government the leverage to pull an emergency brake over free movement.

But the EU and UK would also work on a longer-term settlement – an overdue grand bargain, even – that looks to reshape Europe so that non-euro countries, existing EEA and European Free Trade Agreement states and Britain form a trade-based group that engages with the completely separate eurozone via a new Europe-wide single market area – only one with better checks and balances.

The end result will be a progressive, open, liberal, and democratic nation that can feel more at ease with itself. And a deal the continent of Europe can feel happy with too.

That has to be worth fighting for.

Roland Smith is a fellow of the Adam Smith Institute

Twitter: @Whitewednesday

