How a concession became a non-concession as the early results rolled in

2016-06-24

As the rain stopped and Big Ben tolled, Britain’s referendum vote drew to a close with a concession of defeat that rapidly became a non-concession and victory for one the European Union’s southernmost points in the race to declare the first result.

Here is how the night unfolded.

The bongs of Big Ben have in the past signalled the closure of polling stations but a day of deluges and an apparently bumper turn-out meant the queues – and voting – continued after official closing time.

The passing of the symbolic hour nonetheless brought with it the very first sign of a verdict. The fact that the opinion came from Nigel Farage was perhaps unsurprising, but the tentative opinion of the Ukip leader that he had perhaps lost was not.

Mr Farage, a former stockbroker, said he thought Britain had voted Remain based on “what I know from some of my friends in the financial markets who have done some big polling”.

A YouGov survey, based on fresh questioning of voters yesterday, suggested a 52/48 split in favour of staying in the EU.

Amid warnings from television commentators that any such polls were to be treated with utmost caution, another moment of apparent candour came from the unexpected quarter of a passenger on London’s Tube who found himself travelling home with Boris Johnson. Lewis Iwu, director of the Fair Education Alliance, Tweeted: “Just been asked on tube by @BorisJohnson if I voted leave. I say no. He concedes he’s lost anyway. Awkward.”

The first result of the night comes not from those counting stalwarts of general election night in Sunderland but the denizens of Gibraltar, who benefit from a small electorate and an hour’s time difference with the rest of the UK. The Rock, doubtless acutely aware of its need to maintain good relations with its Spanish and EU neighbours, votes Remain by 19,322 votes to 823. If only, David Cameron and his fellow campaigners may have dreamt, Gibraltar spoke for the Mother Country.

The sort-of concession from Mr Farage becomes an un-concession. The Ukip leader tells the cameras that he doesn’t think it’s all over after all, adding: “The landscape of British politics has changed for ever.”

After two hours of tentative buoyancy for the In campaign, the voters of Newcastle-upon-Tyne deliver a sobering midnight wake up call. The city had been expected to deliver a strong Remain vote but the pro-European campaign scrapes the narrowest of victories with 65,404 votes (50.7 per cent) to 63,598 (49.3 per cent) for Leave. Pollster Professor John Curtice notes wryly that among Remain campaigners “maybe the champagne has gone back in the fridge”.

Across the Tyne, the count in Sunderland removes some more air from the Remain balloon. The city had been expected to vote Out but the margin of victory – 61 per cent to 39 per cent – is at the upper end of Leave hopes and expectations.

It does not take long for verdict in the North East to reverberate around the globe. The pound promptly slides by six per cent against the dollar on foreign exchanges.

American actor Lindsay Lohan reveals her hitherto unpublicised interest in the Brexit debate. She Tweets her thanks to the BBC for explaining “where #Sunderland and #Swindon are”. Ms Lohan, currently visiting London, is on her way to becoming one of the more popular pundits of the night. 

 

The gathering internecine strife in politics is not restricted to the Conservative Party. Shadow leader of the Commons Chris Bryant does not mince his words when former Labour leader Ed Miliband appears on screen. Mr Bryant is heard to remark: “I might go and punch him because he’s a tosspot and he left the party in the state it’s in.”

 

Within four minutes, two totemic results. The City of London, which if it were a nation would have a larger GDP than Turkey, predictably votes heavily for Remain – 75 per cent to 25 per cent. Equally unsurprisingly for a part of the world where even global conglomerates wince at the rent, the result contributes just 3,300 ballots to Remain. More significantly, on the other side of the country in  Swansea, a city regarded as a safe haven for In, the vote is narrowly for Out. Wales, part of the Celtic fringe expected to embrace Brussels, is predicted to give the nod to Brexit. Shortly before this, Google reveals that searches under the term “what happens if we leave the EU?” are up 250 per cent. One Twitter wag adds: “I do hope it’s not David Cameron”.

 

Tempers are starting to fray. In Oxford, a councillor is taken home after clashing with security when he is barred entry. The university city meanwhile votes 70 per cent Remain. Ms Lohan, who reveals she supports In, meanwhile offers: “Good luck with the pound… will take you about 15 years to get it back up”.

 

Former Liberal Democrat Cabinet minister Vince Cable calls it and his verdict is his former colleague David Cameron’s political authority would be “completely gone” in the event of a Leave victory and he would have to resign pretty much immediately. He chides the Prime Minister for a “very bad judgement” in calling the vote, saying he has potentially led Britain into a “legal quagmire”.

 

For the first time since Gibraltar declared, the Remain vote counter overtakes Leave, buoyed by sizable In majorities in the London boroughs of Lambeth and Wandsworth and in Glasgow. But it is short-lived – within 20 minutes Leave is back ahead, nudging beyond the four million mark as heartlands such as Castle Point in Essex keep delivering thumping Out majorities from the shires of England.

 

Those experts so much reviled by some Brexiteers are beginning to clear their throats and – tentatively – talk about a Leave victory. An analysis for ITV News finds there is a 75 per cent chance of Brexit. It reflects an earlier finding by the University of East Anglia which put the chance of Britain remaining at… zero. Leave has a lead of some 300,000 votes at this point. 

 

Amid predictions that shares in London will open five per cent down, Leave-supporting Tory MP Jacob Rees Mogg denies there will be a Brexit-related recession. He tells the BBC: “I can’t promise no recession ever, but not caused by Brexit specifically.”

 

Mr Farage, on a long rhetorical journey tonight, is increasingly confident. He declares Leave’s victory in heartlands Sheffield “amazing”. The Brexit lead has grown by some 200,000 in 20 minutes to 505,000. The Ukip leader tweets: “I now dare to dream that the dawn is coming up on an independent United Kingdom.”

 

The pound has suffered its largest fall ever against the dollar – eight per cent.

Wales votes to leave the EU, despite a chunky Remain majority in Cardiff. Across the media, pundits are beginning to talk about the probability of a Leave victory. Mr Farage has no such need for qualifiers. He says: “Let June 23 go down in our history as our independence day.”

Asked if Mr Cameron should quit if there is a vote in favour of Leave, he replied: “Immediately.”

The BBC follows ITV by calling the referendum for Out. The United Kingdom will be leaving the European Union by a forecast margin of 52 per cent to 48 per cent.

