Polls suggest recovery in support for Remain following murder of Jo Cox

2016-06-19

Britain is heading for a cliffhanger result in the European Union membership referendum, polls suggested ahead of the vote in just three days’ time.

Surveys pointed to a recent recovery in support for a Remain vote – although pollsters are uncertain whether there is any connection between Jo Cox’s murder and the apparent shift in attitudes.

Three polls published today indicated that Thursday’s outcome was still too close to call.

Opinium for the Observer produced a dead heat with each side on 44 per cent, while a Survation poll in the Mail on Sunday showed Leave down three points and Remain up by three, putting Remain ahead by 45 per cent to 42 per cent.

YouGov surveys for Good Morning Britain and the Sunday Times gave headline figures of 44 to 42 per cent for Leave and 44 to 43 per cent for Remain respectively.

Nigel Farage argued that the Labour MP’s killing, and the three day suspension in campaigning which followed it, had removed some impetus from pro-Brexiteers.

“I think we have momentum,” the Ukip leader told ITV’s Peston on Sunday. “We did have momentum until this terrible tragedy. It has had an impact on the whole campaign for everybody.

“When you are taking on the establishment, you need to have momentum. I don’t know what’s going to happen over the course of the next three to four days, but [this was] the action of one person with serious mental issues.”

Anthony Wells, YouGov’s director of political research, said the polls had started moving the day before the killing.

He said the shift might be more to do with fears over the economic impact of Brexit and added: “People tend to move towards the status quo before referendums.”

But Andrew Hawkins, the ComRes chairman, said: “ComRes polling found a strong indication from respondents who were interviewed after Thursday’s awful attack on Jo Cox that it had triggered a more negative response to a Leave win.

“If that is indeed what caused Remain to regain the lead, then it is it is just possible that the tragedy changed the future of the UK and perhaps of the EU as well.”

Following the killing, both camps have pledged to tone down their language about their opponents.

But the even split in public opinion ahead of decision day – with the result potentially resting with the remaining undecided voters – sets the scene for a dramatic final phase of campaigning.

Anti-EU campaigners will be boosted by a ComRes poll for The Independent which found voters felt more strongly about leaving the EU than about staying. Asked how they would feel about Leave result, 44 per cent said they would be “delighted”, whereas only 28 per cent would feel the same about a Remain outcome.

The last major televised setpiece event takes 21st June when the BBC stages a live debate at Wembley Arena.

It will feature the current and former London Mayors, Sadiq Khan and Boris Johnson, arguing the case for Remain and Leave respectively.

Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson and Frances O’Grady, the TUC general secretary, will also support EU membership, while Energy minister Andrea Leadsom and Labour MP Gisela Stuart will argue for quitting the bloc.

