Jeremy Corbyn says workers’ jobs and rights are at risk if Britain leaves Europe

2016-06-21

Jeremy Corbyn urged traditional Labour supporters to vote Remain to protect workers’ jobs and employment rights as the party launched a 48-hour campaigning blitz ahead of Thursday’s referendum.

The Labour leader told supporters in Manchester the economy would be threatened by a downtown if Britain left Europe and workers’ rights would also be put at risk.

“I want to make it very clear,” he said. “The Labour position is for a Remain vote – for staying in. One of the main reasons for this is about jobs and workers’ rights.”

The only way to avoid a race to the bottom on jobs and wages is to work together across the continent to raise standards for all.
Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn

Mr Corbyn, a long-term critic of the EU who has been accused of playing a limited role in the referendum campaign, said Europe had helped to underpin rights including equal pay for women, annual leave, maternity leave and working hours.

He said only by staying in Europe could the movement of workers across borders be regulated and working conditions be improved for people in Britain. He called for a new push to eliminate zero-hours and the creation of a continent-wide minimum wage.

Speaking at the People’s History Museum, he said: “The only way to avoid a race to the bottom on jobs and wages is to work together across the continent to raise standards for all.”

He claimed “several Leave supporters” wanted to “water down workers’ rights” and to “rip up” protections that prevent workplace discrimination and exploitation.

“Three million jobs in Britain are linked to trade with Europe,” Mr Corbyn said. “The whole economy is threatened with a potential downturn.”

His speech was part of a day of action by senior Labour figures with Ed Miliband speaking in Luton, Harriet Harman in Birmingham, Gordon Brown in Glasgow, Neil Kinnock in Cardiff and deputy Labour leader Tom Watson in Brighton.

Alan Johnson, the chairman of the Labour In For Britain campaign, who joined Mr Corbyn in Manchester, said: “The stakes in this referendum are highest for those in our country that have the least – those who need the protection that the social dimension of the Eu offers through rights to paid holiday, rest breaks and control of working hours.”

