A migration promise that has come back to bite the Prime Minister

2016-06-20

It is a question to which David Cameron has no answer, and has never really had one. “Why” – asked audience member June Flecknell in Sunday night’s Question Time special – “did you promise to bring migration down to the tens of thousands in your manifesto when you knew very well you can’t control these numbers?”

The Prime Minister shimmied left, to the subject of emigration from the UK, shimmied right, to the newfound health of EU economies, but would not face it head-on. That is because an honest reply would expose a dishonest piece of work.

Even in 2010, when Mr Cameron first made the promise (“no ifs, no buts”), he would have known that the EU’s freedom of movement made it impossible to be sure of such a steep cut in net immigration. If he held out any hope, that would have been vaporised over the next five years, as quarterly reports from the Office of National Statistics – 20 of them – showed migration not going down, but up. This was the rhythm: May – up, August – up, November – up, February – up. For five years.

A party with gumption would have admitted it went wrong (200,000 people wrong) and sought to explain why. Not this Conservative Party. In 2015 Mr Cameron repeated the pledge, only now watered down from a “target” to an “ambition”. It is like your school’s third-best striker still talking of playing for England in 2020, after a season in which he has scored no goals, and provided no assists.

A reversal would not have hurt much. All the papers knew the “tens of thousands” figure was a MacGuffin. The Prime Minister could have said, in 2015, “migration is testament to how well our economy is doing”, and flipped a story of failure into one of success. Then, to allay fears of going soft, followed up with his aim to limit the benefits EU migrants can access.

“We can’t stop migration from the EU,” he could have said, “but we benefit hugely from the single market, these migrants are crucial to our economy, and we will weed out the tiny minority who don’t contribute.” Broadly, that would have mapped with what Mr Cameron’s EU renegotiations have achieved.

What his manifesto chose to do instead was hand the British public a second scoop of nonsense, and expect them to lap it up. This speaks to Mr Cameron’s worst side; the one that knows the sport of politics so well, he forgets that it is not sport to millions of people. The one who may quote Churchill, but whose PR sheen would lead most would turn the radio off if it ever came to a “fireside chat”. It can feel like the anger at Mr Cameron’s broken promise on net migration is priced into an appreciation of the Conservative party. It shouldn’t be. Many parties have taken the public for a fool in the past. Few have done so while being so profoundly foolish in the same breath. Mr Cameron failed to connect the dots between the repeated promise to cut migration (which only those paying closer attention than they should have to know is watered down) and the promise of a referendum.

There could be no clearer gift to Leave than presenting the Government as pledging to cut migration, but utterly failing to do so, in the face of EU regulations. There is your EU superstate, Mr Farage. There it is, leaving Great Britain powerless, forcing its Prime Minister’s words back down his gullet month after month.

The only thing left to say is that such mendacity marks an exception – albeit an extremely serious one – in Mr Cameron’s referendum campaign, which has otherwise been fought decently. In Vote Leave, fabrication is the norm. The Prime Minister has misled people on migration. A vote for a Brexit would reveal that Vote Leave has misled people on close to everything else.

