Priti Patel ‘could have broken ministerial code’ with Turkish claims

2016-06-16

The leading pro-Brexiteer Priti Patel has been accused of breaking the ministerial code by making “misleading and inaccurate” claims about Turkish membership of the European Union.

The Liberal Democrats have protested that the Employment minister’s comments could inflame racial tensions and have called for an investigation by the Cabinet Secretary, Sir Jeremy Heywood.

They have also urged her to “consider her position as a minister”.

“She has breached the principles of conduct on public life and should consider her position as a minister.”

Lady Manzoor

Their anger centres on her warning that Turkish membership of the EU was being “accelerated with David Cameron’s support”.

Ms Patel also backed a report by the think-tank Migration Watch which forecast 100,000 Turks would head to Britain every year if the country was admitted to the bloc.

Baroness Manzoor, the Lib Dem work and pensions spokeswoman, said in a letter to Sir Jeremy that her claim about Turkey gaining EU membership could be considered an “outright falsehood”.

She added: “I believe it also has the very real potential to stoke public fear and resentment of the existing Turkish community in the UK.”

Lady Manzoor also complained about remarks by the minister on the affordability of Brexit and the ease of untangling EU laws and regulations.

She suggested that Ms Patel could have breached the principles of the Ministerial Code, which requires holders of public office to be “truthful” and take decisions “using the best evidence and without discrimination or bias”.

Lady Manzoor acknowledged that collective responsibility had been suspended during the period of ‘purdah’ and that there should be a “robust debate” during the referendum campaign.

But she claimed that Ms Patel’s statements could have a bearing on her  “impartiality and as a decision-maker” and urged Sir Jeremy to investigate.

She told i: “Priti Patel in has been willing to lend her name to messages aimed at stoking fear around jobs and employment rules.

Her statements directly conflict the Government and the responsibilities she has as Employment Minister.  She has breached the principles of conduct on public life and should consider her position as a minister.”

i has contacted Ms Patel’s spokeswoman for a comment.

 

