Brexit would turn the North into ‘1980s industrial wasteland’

2016-06-16

The North of England could return to a 1980s “industrial wasteland” if Britain votes to leave Europe and the region’s largest cities could face “serious economic danger”, Labour claim.

Former Prime Minister Gordon Brown and leaders of the biggest cities outside London insist that working people in the region will be hardest hit by Brexit.

Mr Brown, speaking in Manchester, said: “I will never forget the 1980s when the Conservatives were turning our industrial heartlands into industrial wastelands.

”I will never forget that ‘you’re on your own – no such thing as society’ ideology which gripped the Conservative party.

Leaving would be a grave threat to our local economies, risking people’s jobs and livelihoods.

“And I will never forget the despair in communities that ministers refused even to visit and the desolation in the faces that these ministers chose never to see.

”What stood between these cities and further devastation was European money – regional funds, structural funds, social funds, training funds for renewal, renovation and regeneration.

“Let us never forget this. The Conservative party tells you, they defend the British people against Europe. Sometimes, Europe has to defend the British people against the Conservative party.”

Mr Brown urged manufacturing workers in the North to tell “fellow citizens” how important European exports are to their jobs and how they risk losing them under Brexit.

Shadow Chancellor John McDonnell, who joined Mr Brown in Manchester, said: “The harsh reality is that this is a Tory Brexit. If Brexit goes through, it will be a Tory government in power, that will implement their Brexit.”

Leaders of the ten biggest cities outside the capital – Birmingham, Bristol, Cardiff, Glasgow, Leeds, Liverpool, Manchester, Newcastle, Nottingham and Sheffield – have also warned that leaving Europe would risk “serious economic danger”.

The Core Cities group said: “Leaving would be a grave threat to our local economies, risking people’s jobs and livelihoods. If we vote for Brexit, it will be those at the sharp end – working people, not the leaders of the Leave campaign – who will pay the price.”

Vote Leave said Britain’s cities would benefit from the cash saved by no longer paying into EU coffers.

Chief executive Matthew Elliott said: “The truth is that the UK’s cities have prospered in spite of our EU membership, not because of it.

”Every week, we send £350 million to the EU, enough to build a fully-staffed NHS hospital. Our cities would benefit hugely if we took back control of this money and spent it on our priorities – such as public services and infrastructure – instead.“

