In praise of Ruth Davidson

2016-06-22

Ruth Davidson has long been the rising star of Scottish politics.

In a combative performance in the final major televised debate of the referendum campaign, she introduced herself to more than 4m voters across the United Kingdom.

The Scottish Tory leader, a passionate Remain supporter, arrived on the UK’s political stage as she delivered a series of blows against Boris Johnson in BBC1’s Question Time.

“You are being asked to make a decision that is irreversible, we can’t change, we wake up on Friday and we don’t like it and we are being sold it on a lie because they lied about the cost of Europe, they lied about Turkey’s entrance to Europe, they lied about the European army because we’ve got a veto over that.

“They put these in their leaflets and they’ve lied about it here tonight too and it’s not good enough. You deserve the truth.”

Ruth Davidson on Question Time



Her selection as the Tory trusted to make the final case for Remain – and make a ‘blue on blue’ assault on Boris – was hugely significant.

It demonstrated that party loyalists believe Ms Davidson is among their strongest performers and ideally qualified to reach out to wavering voters who could be turned off by Conservative Cabinet ministers.

The revival in her party’s prospects north of the border is mainly down to the sheer strength of will she has demonstrated since her election as the Tories’ Scottish leader in 2011.

Where the Conservatives seemed fusty and out of touch, the church-going lesbian kickboxer has projected a more modern image for the party.

She also capitalised on Labour’s collapse in Scotland to position herself at the head of pro-Union sentiment and as a rallying-point for opposition to Nicola Sturgeon and independence.

Her reward was the party’s second place ahead of Labour in last month’s Holyrood elections – a performance which would have been unthinkable just months earlier.

Ms Davidson’s outspoken pro-EU stance is further evidence of her leading from the front. Some 45 per cent of Scottish Tories are thought to support Brexit.

But she has had no hesitation in telling them they are wrong – just as she told the pro-Leavers’ darling, Boris Johnson.

