David Cameron resigns as Prime Minister after Britain votes to leave EU

2016-06-24

David Cameron has announced his resignation as Prime Minister in the wake of Britain’s dramatic decision to leave the European Union by the narrowest of margins.

In an address in front of Downing Street several hours after the result of the historic referendum, Mr Cameron said he intended to step down by October, saying he believed the country required “fresh leadership” to oversee its exit from the EU.

Acknowledging that he was no longer able “to be the captain of the ship” after strongly arguing for Britain to remain a member of the EU, Mr Cameron said there was “no doubt” about the result and that the country needed a strong leader to see it through the exit negotiations.

“The country requires fresh leadership to take it in this direction,” said Mr Cameron. “I will do everything I can as Prime Minister to steady the ship over the coming weeks and months, but I don’t think it would be right for me to try to be the captain that steers our country to its next destination.”

He added that he would remain in charge for now, but that the UK should aim to have a new Prime Minister in place by the start of the Conservative Party conference in October.

He said he would leave it to his successor to invoke Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty, which begins the two-year process of negotiating a new trade relationship with the UK’s former partners.

Although he attempted to reassure the financial markets that the British economy remained “fundamentally strong,” as the Prime Minister was speaking, the economic cost of the UK’s decision to leave the EU became clear. More than £100bn was wiped off the FTSE 100 share index within minutes as markets opened at 8am.

His voice breaking, a clearly emotional Mr Cameron concluded by saying: “I love this country and I feel honoured to have served it.”

Shortly after the Prime Minister’s statement, the Governor of the Bank of England, Mark Carney, said he would “not hesitate” to take action to steady the markets, adding that it would make an extra £250bn available to the banks.

“It will take some time for the UK to establish a new relationship with Europe and the rest of the world. So some market and economic volatility can be expected as this process unfolds, but we are well prepared for this,” he added.

At 6am on Friday morning, it became certain that the UK had voted in favour of a Brexit, with the final result confirmed an hour later. Voters supported Leave by 51.9 per cent to 48.1 per cent, on a high turnout of 72 per cent.

Earlier in the night, predictions of the result prompted the pound to fall to its lowest level against the dollar since 1985 – with traders saying the volatility was more extreme than that seen during the financial crisis in 2008.

Shortly after the result became certain, economists started to downgrade their forecasts for UK growth, describing the outcome as “an act of economic self-harm with global ramifications”. They added that the UK was “likely” to enter a recession.

A regional breakdown of the results shows the country is deeply divided on the subject of Europe, with London, Scotland and Northern Ireland backing a Remain vote but people in Wales and the English shires backing Brexit in large numbers.

The result also raises the prospect of a second referendum on Scottish independence. Nicola Sturgeon, the SNP leader, said it was clear that “the people of Scotland see their future as part of the European Union”, while Scottish Green leader Patrick Harvie said many Scots would feel that “we simply cannot be dragged along with this”.

Scotland voted to stay in the EU by 62 per cent to 38 per cent, with all 32 council areas backing Remain.

However, voters in a host of large English towns and cities, including Sheffield, Middlesbrough, Coventry, Wolverhampton, Barnsley and Oldham, opted to leave the bloc. Britain’s second largest city, Birmingham, also narrowly backed Brexit.

Claiming victory, Gisela Stuart, the Labour MP and chair of the Leave campaign, said: “People were given the impression they had no choice but to Remain, but they voted to Leave.

“It is incumbent on all of us to be very calm and remember our responsibility for the future of the United Kingdom…In the long run we will find that both Europe and the United Kingdom will emerge stronger as a result.”

However, others reacted in disbelief to the result. Former Europe minister and Labour MP Keith Vaz told the BBC: “Frankly, in a thousand years I would never have believed that the British people would have voted this way.

“They have done so, and I think that they voted emotionally rather than looking at the facts. It’ll be catastrophic for our country, for the rest of Europe and indeed the world.”

Harry Potter author JK Rowling, who supported the Remain side, also took to Twitter to express her dismay.

Scotland will seek independence now. Cameron's legacy will be breaking up two unions. Neither needed to happen. https://t.co/4MDj7pndcq

— J.K. Rowling (@jk_rowling) June 24, 2016



