Why Scotland won’t necessarily vote for independence

2016-06-24

The most crucial reason for holding off from the point of view of that this must lead Scotland to secede is that there is little evidence to suggest that support for independence will receive a significant boost as a result of Brexit. The SNP’s leadership is keen to avoid Scotland “doing a Quebec” where a second referendum on independence took place and was defeated, and over 20 years later the prospects of it holding another are all but dead.

The fiscal and economic conditions that an independent Scotland would be subjected to are significantly worse than they were in 2014, with the North Sea struggling due to the low price of oil. This would leave Scotland with an estimated fiscal deficit of £11.9bn (7.8 per cent of GDP) compared to the UK’s fiscal deficit of £59.8bn (3.3 per cent of GDP). It is also unclear how important Scottish voters feel membership of the EU is and whether or not it is more important than economic risk – one of the most important factors that led to a No vote.

The SNP leadership is acutely aware of all this and has informally stated that support for independence would have to consistently remain at about 60 per cent to warrant a second referendum. This has given them a get-out clause of sorts from their “material change in circumstances” policy.

It means the party has a strategic dilemma. Does it give Yes supporters what they want or does it play a longer game? Former leader Alex Salmond has already been talking up the prospect of a vote before the UK’s final withdrawal from the EU in the coming few years.

It remains to be seen whether Sturgeon takes the same tack, however. Many in the pro-independence movement will want a referendum on the basis of democratic principle, but the smart money will be on the SNP’s leadership remaining cautious. If they can keep their supporters at bay, I’d expect them only to make a move when they can be absolutely sure they can win this time around.

This article first appeared on The Conversation

