David Cameron: he gambled on EU membership and lost

2016-06-24

This time last year David Cameron looked invincible.

Against all the forecasts he had secured the first outright Conservative majority for more than two decades in the general election, increasing his party’s number of the seats and its share of the vote.

But the clock was already ticking on the issue that was to destroy his premiership as he embarked on a tour of European capitals pressing for reforms to Britain’s relationship with the EU.

Instead of being remembered as the Tory leader who led his party out of the electoral wilderness, he will go down as the Prime Minister who gambled on Britain’s EU membership – and lost.

And potentially as the Prime Minister who inadvertently paved the way to the disintegration of the United Kingdom.

David Cameron was virtually unknown outside Westminster circles when his Tory leadership campaign caught fire in 2005, propelling him to the top job.

With his plea for the party to stop ‘banging on’ about Europe and to project a more modern appeal to the electorate, the young MP appeared more in tune with changing times than the likes of David Davis and Liam Fox.

His critics on the Conservative Right argued that he should have led the party to a better result in 2010, given that he was facing Gordon Brown, one of the least popular Prime Ministers in living memory.

But the fact remained that unlike his three Tory predecessors he set up home in Downing Street – even if in a slightly awkward cohabiting arrangement with Nick Clegg’s Liberal Democrats.

During the five years of Coalition, he and Chancellor George Osborne imposed deep cuts to public spending through successive austerity programmes designed to cut the national deficit.

They were only partly successful in that aim, but oversaw steady economic growth and job creation.

Ironically that success helped attract jobseekers from less prosperous parts of the EU, fuelling resentment in many areas about the scale of migration.

Mr Cameron forced through reforms to welfare, education and the health service which put him at odds with his Lib Dem partners and ran into strong opposition.

He took on his party’s traditionalists by forcing gay marriage on to the statute book and insisting that the UK stood by his commitments over foreign aid spending.

It is no coincidence that Mr Cameron, who harbours a mixture of progressive and traditionalist instincts, referred to these two issues when he delivered his emotional resignation speech.

Until yesterday he could have reasonably argued that his achievements in office – particularly as he arrived after the economic crash of 2008 – outnumbered his failures.

He also demonstrated that instability and chaos need not inevitably follow the creation of a coalition government – and then displayed his political ruthlessness as the Tories targeted their previous Lib Dem partners during the election.

But now his premiership will forever be remembered for his fatal inability to win over the electors to his European vision in a referendum he never really wanted to hold.

Economic growth that was the envy of many European nations.

Numbers of jobs reached record levels

Millions were lifted out of tax as the tax threshold was raised

Staging a Scottish independence referendum which appeared to have killed off the issue for a generation

The now widely accepted equal marriage legislation

Prevailed in the 2011 referendum on changing the voting system

Crime levels fell despite cuts to police numbers

Won praise for sticking to his guns over increasing spending on foreign aid

Humiliating defeat for his call for military intervention in Syria

Britain’s intervention in Libya removed Gaddafi but left behind a power vacuum filled by feuding groups and jihadis

Immigration levels three times higher than he promised

Had to revise estimates of when the UK would eliminate its structural deficit

Surprise reorganisation of the NHS (not mentioned in the Tory manifesto) ran into huge opposition

The ‘bedroom tax’ was viewed as unfair and heartless

Sharp rises in tuition fees provoked massive protests

The introduction of Universal Credit, which was supposed to revolutionise the benefits system, has been hugely delayed.

