Resist the dramatic, ‘sexy’ thrill of voting to leave the EU

2016-06-16

Each morning, a fresh horror comes through my letterbox. The other day, it was “Britain heading for Brexit”, the front page headline in this very newspaper. Yesterday, Britain’s highest circulation newspaper came with a poster urging us to leave the EU. And thus I survey the news with a heavy heart – a 7 per cent lead for an Out vote, the financial markets spooked and the In campaign in disarray – and find that I can take solace only in my natural optimism.

I was born under the Sagittarius sign, the positive traits of which are to be cheerful, freedom-loving and optimistic. The negative characteristics, however, are blind optimism and a carefree attitude to difficult decisions. I will leave it to you to decide which of these attributes is governing my decision to vote In, but I still think, like the bookmakers do, that we’ll wake up at the end of next week still as members of the European Union.

Not that I’m taking anything for granted. I’m trying to convince people one by one. Today I think I turned an undecided taxi driver with the force of my economic argument, and at dinner the other night, someone complained about “all the regulation from Brussels”. Oh, I said, would that be the regulation that has given us, in no particular order, cleaner beaches, less air pollution, safer food, more protection for consumers, more rights (and holidays) for workers, cheaper phone calls, cheaper flights and has given our businesses access to the greatest single market in the world? I’m not sure she was convinced, but at least I did my bit.

“Even those who may be perfectly satisfied with the social and economic conditions are attracted by the idea of changing the status quo”

I fully understand why the Out campaigners have gained so much traction. I don’t agree with the popular view that they’ve been strategically astute in deploying their arguments. Rather, they’ve taken full advantage of prevailing opinion. The virulent anti-establishment feeling that is palpable in most western democracies, and which explains the advance of UKIP here, the popularity of far-right parties in mainland Europe, and the rise of Donald Trump in the US, has coalesced around the Out campaign. People who are unhappy with their lot, or who have bought into the idea that we are ruled by a remote, expenses-fiddling elite, want things to change, and an Out vote is a perfect expression of protest.

Equally, there is something dramatic – or sexy, to use the overworked argot – about voting to leave. Even those who may be perfectly satisfied with the social and economic conditions are attracted by the idea of changing the status quo. That’s where the In campaign is stymied: it’s hard to excite people and mobilise the electorate to keep things exactly as they are. The opinion polls are a reflection of the dynamics of this referendum, and, indeed, of the respective vigour of each campaign.

I went to a meeting of one of the In campaign groups the other day, attended by many of our captains of industry. A friend observed that it was a very corporate event. “All the entrepreneurs are voting Out,” he said. This may be more or less true, but an entrepreneur is by nature a gambler, a speculator and is bound to support the riskier, more exciting option. The urgings of such as James Dyson and Anthony Bamford – both spectacularly rich men – should be seen through this prism.

There are so many reasons to be pessimistic, and, whatever the outcome, there is likely to be a considerable political upheaval. Nevertheless, I continue to be sanguine. I believe that young people, understanding that this is a decision in which they have an especially vested interest, will get out of bed to vote In. And, conversely, the anti-European feeling prevalent in many predominantly Labour areas is held by a section of the voting public where, traditionally, turn-out is low.

Finally, the most compelling reason for those of us who fervently believe that our interests are best served as part of Europe: the British electorate never gets it wrong.

