A family fall-out over America’s gun laws

2016-06-19

You all know that I think Brexit is the human equivalent of turkeys voting for Christmas. So, I’m going to address an issue that helps explain the EU Leave Vote, the rise of Donald Trump and America’s refusal to countenance gun control measures: our fear of facts and experts.

It’s there in Trump, who told us during a rare foreign “policy” speech, “Look at the experts we’ve had… the experts are terrible” in virtually the same breath as: “I have experts.” What Trump really means is: don’t listen to experts who disagree with me.

It’s there in Michael Gove saying: “I think people in this country are tired of experts.”

And it’s present in the terrifying hold the gun lobby has on American society. It allows the National Rifle Association to attack President Obama and Hillary Clinton after Orlando for daring to make the self-evident connection between the availability of assault weapons and the huge number of deaths by firearms in America compared to the rest of the western world.

When the NRA dismisses Obama and Clinton’s concerns as a “transparent head-fake” what it really means is what it went on to say: they are trying to “destroy the right of law-abiding Americans to defend ourselves”. Trump even argued that if the Orlando clubbers had been armed there would have been fewer deaths.

“Are you saying Trump is wrong on this stuff?” asked my American cousin incredulously when we started arguing about guns, the day after he had horrified me by showing me my family’s domestic weapons arsenal. That was last Sunday in Boston, the morning after the tragic Orlando massacre. “I’m not sure the numbers would bear that out,” he continued. My turn to be incredulous.

But, what’s the point? What’s the point of sending him infographics about American gun fatalities in relation to the rest of the world? What’s the point of saying that 94 per cent of gun deaths in America over the past 35 years are by non-Muslims? We’re all taking leave of our senses and voting with increasingly bitter hearts, not heads.

Stefano Hatfield is global editorial director, John Brown Media

