John McDonnell: The weakest parts of the UK will suffer most from this shock

2016-06-24

Yesterday’s vote was a seismic shock, not just to the political system but to our economy. After six years of George Osborne’s failed austerity measures, we have an economy that is poorly-placed to withstand it.

Investment by businesses had already fallen ahead of the vote, and will almost certainly fall still further. Real wages have not yet recovered to their pre-crash level. And our current account, which shows how much we earn from the rest of the world, and how much we pay, is massively in the red.

We are borrowing massive sums from the rest of the world to sustain our economy, making us (in the words of Mark Carney) “dependent on the kindness of strangers”.

That kindness may now be in short supply, given the vote. The turmoil on the stock market and the plummeting value of the pound demonstrate this. It is also clear that this Government, having called the referendum, has little idea what to do next.

We know, however, that the Tory Brexiteers have already made clear they want to tear up hard-won rights for working people. Priti Patel has said Britain should “halve” the current protection offered to workers. The Labour Party and the whole labour movement will fight tooth and nail to defend those rights.

We have to understand what lay behind this vote. Leave votes were highest in those parts and amongst those people who have felt left behind by successive governments. Leave played to that sense of alienation from Westminster politics, and pounced on genuine concerns about migration.

The shock caused by Brexit will be felt most heavily in those places where the economy is weak. This is no time for George Osborne to double-down on spending cuts and his failed austerity programme, as he threatened before the vote. He has no mandate for this, and even 65 Tory MPs have rejected it.

Labour will oppose any Brexit austerity Budget. We need, instead, for the Government to abandon its economically indefensible 2019 surplus and launch a priority investment programme, targeting those areas that have been most economically neglected.

There are vital infrastructure projects starved of funding by George Osborne’s cuts. We need to move fast to support the country, create jobs, and start to address the years of neglect.

John McDonnell is the shadow Chancellor

