Kenyan survivors of the Mau Mau uprising testify from 4,000 miles away

2016-06-17

Robert Ngethe remembers vividly the day the “Njonis” – white men dressed in skirts – came to his home and took him away for two years of detention, forced labour and beatings.

Sat behind a desk in the offices of a Nairobi law firm, the 84-year-old this week recounted events six decades ago via a video link to a judge 4,000 miles away in London’s Royal Courts of Justice hearing one of the largest ever lawsuits revisting the dark side of Britain’s colonial past.

Mr Ngethe, a spry octogenarian, is one of nearly 41,000 elderly Kenyans who are suing the Foreign Office for a list of grim crimes and misdeeds they insist were committed in Britain’s name – and with London’s tacit approval – during the repression of the Mau Mau rebellion in the 1950s.

 “The system was designed to ‘break’ its unconvicted victims of their unstated and un-adjudicated ‘crimes’. It was reported to, and approved by the UK Cabinet. When the beaters and torturers went to work, a collective blind eye was turned.”

Simon Myerson QC

The case far exceeds the size of a previous class action brought by survivors of the uprising which presaged Kenyan independence and the eventual end of empire. In 2013, then Foreign Secretary William Hague announced payouts totalling some £20m and expressed “sincere regret” for the torture suffered by 5,228 claimants at the hands of those instructed by colonial administrators.

But the Government is defending the new claim, which covers a wider range of wrongdoing and is likely to result in a far larger compensation bill if the testimony from 27 test cases, including Mr Ngethe, is accepted by the courts, along with evidence that Britain and its regime in Nairobi purposely put in place a system to unlawfully “break” tens of thousands of detainees during the eight-year “emergency” declared in 1952.

Speaking in the language of his Kikuyu tribe, whose lands were requisitioned for white settlers in a move which led to the Mau Mau uprising, Mr Ngethe said he had been arrested in 1954 by a detachment of Scottish soldiers and subsequently transported to disease-riddled detention camps.

He said: “The Njonis were wearing clothing that looked like skirts. We didn’t know until later that they were foreign policemen from Scotland.

“When we woke up we found our house surrounded. They used red and green cards – if you were given a green card you could leave. If you were given a red card you were put in an area to be taken to a detention camp. We weren’t asked questions or given reasons. We were just arrested.”

Speaking in slow, measured terms, the farmer’s son detailed how he was transported to perform forced labor in several camps, including one where he claimed he had been made dig burial trenches for up to 30 victims of typhoid every day.

In a written statement, he added: “If an inmate made a mistake, there was collective punishment. On these occasions, the prison officers would beat me with big canes. I was beaten all over my body – shoulders, back, legs arms and head.

“Prison officers would stand in two lines and the detainees had to walk through the line and it is at this point that the wardens would beat the detainees.”

The suppression of the rebellion remains one of the darkest episodes of Britain’s imperial era with more than a million members of the Kikuyu and other tribes placed in camps and “protected villages”, since considered to be little better than concentration camps designed to punish whole ethnicities.

The test claims are designed to assess the range of illegal actions alleged to have taken place as Kenya’s colonial government sought to isolate and punish the Mau Mau, who were themselves responsible for atrocities. The suffering ranged from the mass burning of villages to depraved sexual torture.

One 83-year-old woman, known only as MNI, told the court that she had taken the Mau Mau “oath” but was then rounded up and on one occasion taken away by two Kenyan guards employed by the colonial authorities and held down on a trail of ants while naked.

She said: “The ants crawled up my entire body, including my private parts, head and armpits. As this happened, I cried and screamed due to the immense pain I felt. They told me they were doing this because I was a Mau Mau… Even now, some 60 years on when I think of this incident I cry.”

The High Court is due to continue hearing video link evidence from survivors next week before a further ten claimants travel to London next month to testify in person. Four of the 27 test cases involve mothers who will describe how their mistreatment led to the deaths of their infant children.

Simon Myerson QC, for the claimants, said: “The system was designed to ‘break’ its unconvicted victims of their unstated and un-adjudicated ‘crimes’. It was reported to, and approved by the UK Cabinet. When the beaters and torturers went to work, a collective blind eye was turned.”

Despite acknowledging “abhorrent violations of human dignity” in the previous claim, the Government did not admit liability and is contesting the current lawsuit, arguing that there cannot be a fair trial of the claims because those alleged to have authorised or inflicted the violence are either dead or untraceable and the claims against them tested.

The case, which is being led by Manchester-based Tandem Law, is expected conclude next summer. 

 

