A historic night as Manchester announces the EU Referendum vote to the world

2016-06-24

There was a strange feeling of calm at the centre of the storm at Manchester Town Hall as the polls closed and the city awaited its moment to announce the national referendum result to the world.

As the first declarations from across Britain began to appear on silent TV screens, the media and local MPs slowly began to fill up the Neo-Gothic building’s Great Hall.

The room, described by John Ruskin as “the most truly magnificent Gothic apartment in Europe” is lined with paintings which had ominous names for EU Referendum night.

One fresco named “The establishment of the Flemish weavers in Manchester” by Ford Madox Brown hangs next to another named “The expulsion of the Danes from Manchester”.

There was a growing sense of tension in the corridors of Manchester Town Hall by 3am when it became clear that Britain’s future was balanced on a knife-edge.

UKIP’s deputy leader Paul Nuttall, buoyed after early votes by Sunderland and Swindon to Leave, said it was “flip a coin time”.

He added: “It’s going to be a roller-coaster night. The intelligence we’re getting from around the country is that the Leave vote has turned out, so it’s all positive at the moment.”

The Shadow Home Secretary and Leigh MP Andy Burnham, speaking before Wigan voted to Leave, said there was “still a long way to go”.

“There are places where the vote has been very split,” he said: “I think its going to go right down to the wire.”

In the Great Hall, where bleary-eyed Remain and Brexit campaigners were watching the results rolling in on the TV screens, there was a sudden burst of activity at about 5am.

Leave campaigners suddenly started hugging one another and punching the air as it became clear that their Brexit dream had become a reality.

One UKIP MEP was heard to say: “I’m going to phone my mum.”

Amid jubilant scenes, UKIP’s Paul Nuttall said: “We’ll now be able to take charge of our borders, our destiny, our laws, our own money. Today will be independence day for this country. It will go down in the annals of history.

Nigel Evans, the Conservative MP for the Ribble Valley, was almost moved to tears as he hugged fellow Leave supporters.

Amid cheers and applause, he said: “All I can say is thank you to the British people. We asked you to vote for us to leave the European Union and that’s exactly what you’ve done. The United Kingdom is an independent country once again.”

Shell-shocked Remain supporters reacted quickly as it became clear that the Leave campaign had won.

Wigan MP Lisa Nandy said: “Like many people, I feel very anxious about what happens next. The key thing now is that we work together to heal this country that has been so fractured by this debate, and to negotiate the future.

“The top priority must be to ensure that we protect people who can least afford to bare the brunt of an economic downturn.”

Rochdale MP Simon Danczuk said: “There has been a failure of mainstream parties to engage with the electorate in the way the electorate expect them to.

“This referendum has not just been a vote about Europe, it’s been about immigration, it’s been a vote about the public, particularly in the North of England, disconnecting with the mainstream political parties.

“You know, if you were to remain in Europe, then Labour had to deliver some of the Remain votes from their core Labour voters and they just didn’t do that.”

Labour MP Gisela Stuart, the chair of the Vote Leave campaign, arrived in the Great Hall and addressed the assembled media – surprising them by giving part of her speech in German.

Amid cheers and applause from Leave campaigners, she said: “We must make clear to all our colleagues in Europe that Britain is an open society, a welcoming society and we will continue to co-operate with European countries on an international level.”

She added: “People were given the impression that they had no choice but to remain, but they voted to leave. It is now incumbent on all of us to be very calm and remember our responsibilities to the future of the United Kingdom.”

Conservative MEP and Leave supporter David Campbell Bannerman pondered the fact that he was now out of a job.

He said he would look forward to returning to Strasbourg as a tourist.

“I have campaigned for my own redundancy, it is true.

“It is really important that we put the country first and I thank the British people for seeing through all the scares and having the guts and the principle and the common sense to support leaving the European Union.”

Maciej Woroch, a journalist at the TVN, the biggest private TV channel in Poland, said: “I’m shocked. I didn’t like the idea of Britain leaving Europe, but the polls had been saying they would remain.

“It don’t believe it – it shouldn’t be happening. Europe doesn’t want to lose Britain.”

It was something of an anti-climax when chief counting officer Jenny Watson finally read out the national EU Referendum result just after 7.20am.

To cheers from Brexit campaigners, she said: “This means that Britain has voted to leave the European Union.”

