‘Jo Cox was such a dare-devil’ – personal tribute to campaigning MP

2016-06-16

By Kate Proctor

I met Jo Cox many times, but an interview just before Christmas in the House of Commons stands out. I was met with a hug – most rare in Parliament – and we chatted for an hour about her life over a cup of tea. I think it might have been one of the first times she had sat and taken stock of what she had achieved.

Anyone who knew Jo knows she was a tiny woman, absolutely petite, with a blunt brown bob, with a love of bright scarves that always made her stand out in Parliament. You weren’t to be fooled by that diminutive stature though. Sarah Champion, MP for Rotherham, described her as a lion, and I’d agree.

She was incredibly fit, and such a dare-devil – she found out she was pregnant with her son while climbing on the Isle of Skye. Giggling, she told me she had morning sickness while abseiling down the Inaccessible Pinnacle, or Sgùrr Dearg to those Munroists in the know. “Which is not the best!” she laughed. In the mountain’s honour she named her son Cuillin. I got the impression that little tale was just one of the many adventurous anecdotes that sprinkled her life and impressed those she met.

She was always the first to praise Yorkshire and her childhood in Heckmondwike. She grew up with her mum Jean, a school secretary, and dad Gordon, who worked in a toothpaste and hairspray factory in Leeds. Her sister Kim works at Bradford College. She spoke so fondly of her family, it was clear to see they were her foundation. After Heckmondwike Grammar School, she studied social and political science at Pembroke College, Cambridge, graduating in 1995. She was the first in her family to go to university.

“Sarah Champion, MP for Rotherham, described her as a lion, and I’d agree”

Her political awakening started at Cambridge and she often said she’d had the sharp shock that where you were born mattered. She told me: “How you spoke mattered… who you knew mattered. I didn’t really speak right or knew the right people. I spent the summers packing toothpaste at a factory working where my dad worked and everyone else had gone on a gap year! I had no idea that’s what you did. Or you should travel to broaden your mind or network.”

“To be honest my experience at Cambridge really knocked me for about five years. I just felt like I wasn’t quite up to speed with everyone else.

“I was a happy-go-lucky 18-year-old from Yorkshire going out in Leeds having a good time. A lovely life and a lovely family. Then I was thrown into a Cambridge environment where I just didn’t get it. It shook me. All my norms and everything I was used to didn’t feel like they were right anymore.”

But she thrived academically and after university she became political adviser to Joan Whalley, MP for Stoke-on-Trent North, then Glenys Kinnock MEP.

