Ukip politician denies racism after telling Muslim ‘real British public don’t trust your sort’

2016-06-22

Bristol’s first ever Ukip councillor has denied being a racist after an email thread revealed him telling a Muslim constituent: “The vast majority of the ‘real’ British public don’t trust your ‘sort’ and we don’t want you in our civilised country”.

Michael Frost, who lost his council seat last month, rounded on a local entrepreneur who had sent a passage from the Koran to the Bristol council mailing list to celebrate the beginning of Ramadan, the 

Mr Frost told

The email exchange occurred after Abdelhakim Jahad, who is based at the St Paul’s Learning and Family Centre, sent an extract from the Koran saying: “Blessed is the month of Ramadan. It is the month of prayer and guidance, discipline and tolerance, repentance and charity.”

Mr Frost replied:

“Tell this to all the innocent people you and your type have murdered.

“Shame on you and the bastard scum who kill in the name of Islam.”

Mr Jahad responded by saying:

“I’m a practicing Muslim but have not killed any body. I’m sorry that you feel that way, as have extended my hand to you.

“You do not know me yet you (are) insulting me. It is very common of your sort to insult every Muslim but thank you anyhow I shall endeavour not to trouble you again. God Bless

Mr Frost replied:

“The vast majority of the ‘real’ British public don’t trust your ‘sort’ and we don’t want you in our civilised country.

“Please stop using the word ‘righteousness’ until you understand what it means, unless you think that mutilating your young girls private parts, making your women subservient and brainwashing your young men to leave their families and waste their lives fighting a hopeless war is Righteousness.”

Mr Jahad responded with a long email calling for unity, saying:

“If there is an ounce of intellect perhaps you’ll do yourself justices and go back to study a bit more prior to making anymore bold statements, all it shows is your arrogance and naivety.”

Michael Frost told i:

“I’m not a racist. I refute any calls of racism at all. Just saying what a lot of people think is what doesn’t happen enough in this country.”

“I think they’re making a mountain out of a molehill because it’s the day before the referendum and they’re trying to paint me as some kind of far-right activist. Nothing could be further from the truth.”

i contacted Mr Jahad for comment. He earlier chose not to respond to the Bristol Post story.

