Ched Evans signed by Chesterfield as he awaits rape trial

2016-06-20

Ched Evans, who faces a retrial for rape in October, has been offered the chance to return to football by League One side Chesterfield on a one-year deal.

The former Wales international striker was jailed in 2012 for raping a 19-year-old woman in May 2011. But that conviction was quashed by the Court of Appeal in April.

After serving half of his five-year sentence, the 27-year-old, who has always denied the charges, was released from prison in October 2014.

“We are delighted to have secured the services of an outstanding footballer, who is now keen to get back to work and score goals”

But when the ex-Manchester City, Norwich and Sheffield United forward tried to resume his career with Oldham Athletic, the club pulled out after their staff received death threats and pressure from sponsors.

Olympic heptathlon champion Jessica Ennis-Hill said she wanted her name to be removed from a stand at Sheffield United’s ground Bramall Lane if he re-signed for the South Yorkshire club, which also had three club patrons resign over the issue. The stand was eventually renamed anyway after a sponsorship deal with a local estate agent.

The player had been using The Blades’ training facilities on his release but after more than 170,000 people signed a petition against it, the club withdrew its offer.

Chesterfield’s chairman, Dave Allen, said of signing Mr Evans: “We are delighted to have secured the services of an outstanding footballer, who is now keen to get back to work and score goals. Chesterfield Football Club have given a great deal of thought to this signing and following the court’s decision, we are in no doubt that Ched Evans should be welcomed back into his profession.”

Mr Evans said he was excited and privileged to be resuming his career at Chesterfield. “I hope to make a valuable contribution both on and off the pitch for the football club, the fans and the community,” he said.

His retrial takes place on 4 October. The Criminal Cases Review Commission (CCRC) referred his case to the Court of Appeal after a 10-month investigation. The Appeal judges were satisifed it was the interests of justice” to quash the original conviction. A panel of three judges then decided to allow a retrial, having heard “fresh evidence” from Mr Evans’s lawyers.

