‘Pure evil’ Ben Butler given life for murder of daughter he fought to win back

2016-06-21

A father who fought a high-profile custody battle for the return of his young daughter has been jailed for a minimum of 23 year after he was convicted of murdering the child in a vicious rage just 11 months after winning her back.

Ben Butler, 36, a jobless former removal driver, inflicted such horrific head injuries on his six-year-old daughter Ellie at the family home in Sutton, Surrey, in October 2013 that experts compared them to the trauma likely to be suffered by the victim of a high-speed car crash. Paramedics who attended the scene described a “boggy mess” at the back of Ellie’s head.

A jury at the Old Bailey had heard how Butler waited for two hours after attacking the schoolgirl before calling 999 and instead called Ellie’s mother and his partner, Jennie Gray, home from work. Together they concocted an elaborate cover story to destroy evidence and stage the scene as if Ellie had suffered an accidental fall while jumping in her bedroom.

“I’ll fight for the rest of my life – unbelievable… I will fight for ever to prove this wrong. My daughter was jumping in the house. I’m 100 per cent not guilty”

Ben Butler

The court heard the couple even sent her younger sibling into the room to “discover” the six-year-old on the pretence that some cake was waiting for her downstairs. A cake was also bought and cut up to perpetuate the lie.

Butler had been previously convicted of shaking Ellie when she was a baby but when this conviction was overturned on appeal he and Gray fought a long and highly-publicised battle to have the child return to their care in 2012 after she had been looked after by her maternal grandparents, Neal and Linda Gray. Butler, who had other convictions for violence, hired the now disgraced PR manager Max Clifford and toured television studios pleading his case.

After a ruling by an eminent High Court judge specialising in family law, Mrs Justice Hogg, that Ellie should indeed return to her parents, Neal Gray is said to have warned the judge she would have “blood on your hands”.

Some 11 months after the ruling, during which Ellie also suffered a broken shoulder that her parents failed to seek medical attention for, the schoolgirl was found with catastrophic head injuries which jurors ruled unanimously had been inflicted by Butler in a volcanic rage.

The 36-year-old was sentenced to life imprisonment for murder with a minimum tariff of 23 years. Gray, a graphic designer, was jailed for 42 months after admitting perverting the course of justice and being convicted of child cruelty. The mother-of-two was told after the verdicts that her own mother had died on the first day of the trial, a fact her father had decided should be kept from her.

“You are a self-absorbed, ill-tempered, violent and domineering man”

Trial judge Mr Justice Wilkie

Both Butler and Gray protested their innocence from the dock. Butler shouted: “I’ll fight for the rest of my life – unbelievable… I will fight for ever to prove this wrong. My daughter was jumping in the house. I’m 100 per cent not guilty.”

Prosecution experts had told the trial that the case was one of the worst incidences of domestic abuse that they had come across. In a statement that was not put before the court, a former girlfriend of Butler described him as “pure evil”.

Sentencing Butler, Mr Justice Wilkie said: “You are a self-absorbed, ill-tempered, violent and domineering man who, I am satisfied, regarded  your children and your partner as trophies having no role other than to fit in with your  infantile and sentimentalised fantasy of family life with you as the patriarch whose every whim was to be responded to appropriately.”

The court had heard that after the family was reunited in 2012, Butler became frustrated at his role as a stay-at-home father  and bombarded Gray with a stream of expletive-strewn text messages showing an abusive and violent relationship.

Butler complained that he was “about to flip” and called his partner a “dog whore” and “bitch” on numerous occasions.

Ellie died on 23 October 2013 while her father was looking after her and her sibling alone. Experts said her wounds suggested she had been either thrown against a wall or struck by a blunt instrument.

Prosecutors said that Gray, who insisted throughout the trial that her partner was innocent, had been willing to cover up for Butler to exclusion of everything else, including the wellbeing of her own daughter.

Judge Wilkie told the sobbing mother that she appeared to  have been “exceptionally naive and stupid” to have taken part in the cover up.

He added: “You played your full part in the grotesque charade that was the 999 call whilst subjecting your dead daughter to the indignity of pointless CPR when you knew full well she had been dead for two hours.”

