Bookies give high chances for Remain outcome to EU referendum as odds u-turn

2016-06-20

Betting odds for punters gambling on the outcome of the EU referendum u-turned over the weekend, showing a huge shift in favour of staying in the European Union.

A surge in customers betting on a “Remain” outcome to the vote on Britain’s membership of the EU has seen the odds of a Leave vote drop to below 30 percent at some high street bookmakers.

Ladbrokes is a now offering odds of 3/10 on the UK opting to retain its EU membership, equivalent to a 73 per cent chance, and the bookie has given just a 27 per cent chance of Britain voting to leave the EU, saying that 95 per cent of betting on Monday was for a Remain vote.

Ladbrokes: 95% of money staked today has been for REMAIN #EUref pic.twitter.com/lkiIg0en5G

— Ladbrokes Politics (@LadPolitics) June 20, 2016

Paddy Power (11/4), Sky Bet (11/4), Coral (12/5), and Betfred (11/4) have all lengthened their odds on Britain voting to leave the EU, with William Hill cutting their odds on Remain twice, as they went from 4/11 to 1/3 and then to 2/7, and lengthening their odds for Leave.

Betfair, which says £40.5m has already been traded on the Betfair Exchange on the referendum, has also reported an increased likelihood of a Remain vote, as the implied probability of Britain opting to stay in the EU rockets from 65 percent to 72 percent.

With the referendum mere days away, the figures represent a massive swing towards Remain since last week when bookies were offering their shortest ever odds on a Leave vote.

Betfair says £40.5 million has so far been chanced on the result of the referendum – beating the Scottish Independence referendum to make it the biggest political betting event in British history.

The frenzied political climate and excitement created by the looming vote has prompted some people to place bets for the first time, according to William Hill.

They say that one London woman’s first time bet wagered £100,000 on a Remain vote – a gamble that will see a return of £40,000 should her prediction be correct – and another woman from Kingston, South West London making her first bet putting £10,000 on Leave.

A spokeswoman for Betfair Naomi Totten said: “This market continues to mimic the pattern of the Scottish Referendum, where historical confidence in the eventual ‘No’ vote slipped slightly ten days before referendum day only to resettle in the week of the vote.”

A spokesman for William Hill Graham Sharpe said so far 66 per cent of all the money staked on the EU referendum has been placed on Remain, but 69 per cent of all individual bets placed are for Leave, although he is expecting a massive spike in betting on Thursday with many people leaving their decision to gamble until the last minute.

