Delia Smith and Ulrika Jonsson to clash in Jeremy Paxman’s Channel 4 EU debate

2016-06-20

Rick Astley, Delia Smith and Ulrika Jonsson will join Nigel Farage, Chuka Umunna and Lord Heseltine in a final eve-of-poll EU Referendum debate on Channel 4, presented by Jeremy Paxman.

An eclectic 150-strong panel of the great, the good and the “are-they-still-going?” will seek to persuade waverers in a final, 90-minute blow-out, broadcast live on Wednesday night.

The 80s singer Astley, back on top of the charts this week, cook Delia Smith, actress Leslie Ash and 1967 Eurovision winner Sandie Shaw will join Labour’s Umunna, former Shadow Home Secretary Yvette Cooper, Alastair Campbell and former Scottish First Minister Alex Salmond to make the case for Remain.

Jonsson, the Swedish-born television presenter who made her career in Britain, will declare for Leave.

She is joined by fellow broadcaster Selina Scott, Mike Read, the Ukip-supporting DJ whose “calypso” song was withdrawn following accusations that it was racist, former Tory MP Louise Mensch and Lord Lawson.

They will make a last-minute pitch to a group of “undecideds”, which includes the former footballer Clarke Carlisle and the winner of 2006 series of The Apprentice, Michelle Dewberry.

Sarah Sands, editor of the London Evening Standard, is also listed among the undecided guests -although her paper urged London to back Remain on Wednesday.

Channel 4 said Paxman would preside over a rotating panel discussion which will centre on “the key issues of the referendum, the economy, immigration, sovereignty and security.”

The 150 handpicked guests will be split evenly between remain, leave and undecideds.

The Remain case will be given intellectual ballast by the military historian Antony Beevor and Professor Germaine Greer.

PY Gerbeau, the French entrepreneur parachuted in to run the Millennium Dome after its disastrous opening, returns to make the case to stay, along with Billie JD Porter, the television presenter who made her breakthrough with The Joy of Teen Sex.

The Only Way Is Essex personality Lydia Bright is for Leave and will make common cause with Ann Widdecombe, Celebrity Big Brother contestant Chloe Goodman, the television nutritionist Gillian McKeith and Jacob Rees-Mogg MP.

Channel 4, which has a mandate to engage a younger audience, not catered for by rivals, has spent months assembling the line-up.

The broadcaster, currently being sized up for privatisation by the Brexit-backing Culture Secretary John Whittingdale, promised “a 90-minute discussion including a wide range of well-known and passionate guests including leading politicians, opinion formers and other high profile pro and anti-protagonists.”

A BBC1 Question Time special in which David Cameron fielded questions from a studio audience attracted nearly 4m viewers on Sunday night, some 1.5m more viewers than the struggling Top Gear on BBC2.

The television cook famed for her no-nonsense style, has sold 21m books. Smith says of the Leave campaign: “The now daily dose of scare tactics simply beggars belief, and do you know what? It so isn’t working.”

A series of fake Vote Leave campaign domains now “rickroll” webclickers to a video of Astley singing Never Gonna Give You Up. Not known for his political views, the 80s soul singer has the ears of the nation again after scoring a surprise number one album.

A blow for Remain as the Swedish immigrant who built her career in Britain sides with Leave. Jonsson interviewed Gordon Brown for a programme Ulrika in Euroland and may have been scarred by her experience co-hosting the Eurovision Song Contest.

The former BBC Breakfast Time presenter and bête noire of Donald Trump, Scott is a campaigner for wildlife conservation and countryside management. Believes her farmhouse is haunted by ghosts but will Brexit rid Scott of her spook intruders?

@adamsherwin10

