Anti-Islam party to contest Jo Cox’s Batley and Spen seat in by-election

2016-06-19

A former BNP member has announced his intention to contest the Batley and Spen by-election on behalf of “anti-islamisation” party Liberty GB.

On 19th June, the right wing political group announced that their press officer Jack Buckby will run for the position of formerly held by Jo Cox.

Why I'm standing for #JoCox's seat in the Batley and Spen constituency: https://t.co/iZCYPo0POF

— Jack Buckby (@jackbuckby) June 19, 2016



Buckby was formerly a prominent member of the youth branch of the BNP, but he left the party in 2013.

The Conservatives, Liberal Democrats and Ukip have all agreed not to contest the by-election in honour of the late Labour MP who was shot outside Birstall Library on 16 June following an advice surgery to constituents.

In a statement earlier today, Mr Buckby said: “While the murder of Jo Cox is tragic, we must not let this tragedy blur the fact that the Labour Party is responsible for the demographic and cultural assault on Britain which has already done great damage in areas of Yorkshire.”

He added: “”We cannot let Jo Cox’s tragic death be in vain. We must use this election as an opportunity to create dialogue and give a voice to the millions of working and middle class Britons who are seeing their communities trashed by an arrogant and out-of-touch political class.”

Since Jo Cox’s murder, Liberty GB has already faced criticism after posting a tribute to the MP across their social media platforms titled “Death of a Fool.”



Mr Buckby has also criticised the decision to donate funds raised through a GoFundMe page set up in Jo Cox’s memory to Hope Not Hate, a charity that monitors right-wing behaviour in the UK.

He said: “Nasty ‘Hope Not Hate’ being given tens of thousands of pounds from the Jo Cox fundraising. And they moan about people ‘politicising’ the killing.”

Nasty 'Hope Not Hate' being given tens of thousands of £ from the Jo Cox fundraising. And they moan about people 'politicising' the killing?

— Jack Buckby (@jackbuckby) June 18, 2016



Liberty GB was founded three years ago by former BNP member Paul Weston, who was arrested for a racially aggravated crime in April 2014.

On its website, the party describe itself as being an “anti-islamisation” party, citing their aims as being to “abolish the human rights act, halt any further immigration for at least five years and to promote British values and assimilation, rather than multiculturalism.”

