Jeremy Corbyn says Jo Cox killed by ‘well of hatred’

2016-06-17

David Cameron and Jeremy Corbyn have condemned the killing of Jo Cox in a symbolic display of political unity as the Labour leader declared the MP’s life had been taken by “the well of hatred.”

Mr Corbyn and the Prime Minister travelled to Mrs Cox’s West Yorkshire constituency to lay flowers together as it was announced that Parliament will be recalled on Monday to enable politicians to weigh the events of Thursday afternoon, when the mother-of-two was stabbed and then shot in the street in the market town of Birstall.

Police were continuing to piece together the history of Thomas Mair, the 52-year-old man arrested on suspicion of killing Ms Cox, after it emerged he had ordered books from an American neo-Nazi group including a guide on how to make a homemade gun.

The father of the MP’s assistant, Fazila Azwat, said his daughter had tried to intervene in the attack and then comfort her as the extent of her injuries became clear. Ghulam Maniyar, a former Labour councillor, said: “She said her injury was so bad, and she was in her arms. There was lots of blood. She said ‘Jo, get up’ but she said ‘No, my pain is too much Fazila’. And I think those were the last words Jo spoke.”

“She was taken from us in an act of hatred, in a vile act that has killed her” 

Jeremy Corbyn

Mr Cameron and Mr Corbyn, accompanied by Commons Speaker John Bercow and shadow Foreign Secretary Hilary Benn, bowed their heads as they laid bouquets at the foot of a memorial in Birstall’s market square – the other side of which remained cordoned off behind police tape marking the spot where Mrs Cox was killed.

The Labour leader said: “She was taken from us in an act of hatred, in a vile act that has killed her. It is an attack on democracy what has happened today. It is the well of hatred that killed her.”

Mr Cameron said the nation was “rightly shocked”  at the death of the 41-year-old former aid worker and called for public to “value, and see as precious, the democracy we have on these islands”.

He added: “If we truly want to honour Jo, then what we should do is recognise that her values – service, community, tolerance – the values she lived by and worked by, those are the values that we need to redouble in our national life in the months and years to come.”

The Conservatives, Liberal Democrats and Ukip said they would not be contesting the by-election resulting from the death of Mrs Cox, who became an MP at last year’s general election with a majority of 6,057. 

As one former Labour minister warned against the level of “vitriol” in the EU referendum debate, the German Chancellor Angela Merkel took the unusual step of appearing to urge British politicians to moderate their language ahead of next week’s vote.

Responding to a question about Mrs Cox’s murder, Ms Merkel said: “We know how important it is to draw limits, be it in the choice of speech, in the choice of the argument but also in the choice of partly disparaging argument. Otherwise the radicalisation will become unstoppable.”

The National Police Chiefs’ Council said forces were contacting MPs to offer advice on security as politicians insisted that their weekly constituency surgeries went ahead.

Dan Jarvis, Labour MP for Barnsley Central, said: “I know MPs are scared. We’ll be reviewing our security, but I’ll walk through Barnsley today like every Friday.”

Vigils were last night due to take place at locations including Parliament Square in London, where thousands were expected to attend. A special prayer meeting was also to be held at a Muslim community centre in Batley, part of Mrs Cox’s constituency.

 

 

