EU referendum: Beware of Twitter bots set up to sway undecided voters

2016-06-22

Undecided voters in the run-up to the EU referendum may be advised to beware making a decision based solely on what they see on Twitter (we know – of course you wouldn’t!) – there’s lots of Leave and Remain bots about.

A study found that just one per cent of Twitter accounts were responsible for around half a million tweets about the EU referendum, suggesting bots – automated accounts which replicate themselves to deliver news, re-tweet content or spread spam – were in use.

“You don’t need to sway that many voters to be influential”

Professor Andrew Russell

Researchers analysed 1.5 million tweets with hashtags relating to EU referendum sent from nearly 314,000 accounts from 5 June to 12 June.

Of the tweets, 54 per cent were in favour of vote Leave, 20 per cent for Remain and 26 per cent were neutral, according to the research in Bots, #StrongerIn, and #Brexit: Computational Propaganda during the UK-EU Referendum.

Therefore, a large amount of bot traffic is likely to have been about the Leave campaign.

The most active accounts from each side of the debate – @ivoteLeave and @ivotestay – are thought to be political bots.

They had “a small but strategic role in the referendum conversations,” said Dr Phil Howard, a professor at the University of Oxford who worked on the study.

Bence Kollanyi, a PhD student at Corvinus University in Budapest who co-authored the study, told i he was concerned the bots could influence the decision of undecided voters because lack of transparency meant Twitter users could not easily detect their accounts.

“Large activity on one side of the referendum could create an [image of] false popularity of that side.”

Twitter traffic had hugely increased in the run-up to the referendum, which was partly down to heated discussion and partly down to bot activity, Mr Kollanyi added.

Andrew Russell, a professor of politics at the University of Manchester, explained that bot activity could be important because polls suggested the referendum results would be close. “You don’t need to sway that many voters to be influential.”

But bots generally make little difference among the huge amounts of information on the internet. “[Bots] are just a contemporary version of friends of friends talking about straight bananas,” Prof Russell told i.

