Miner dies after gas blast at North-east potash mine

2016-06-17

A miner has died after an underground gas blast at one of Europe’s deepest mines.

John Anderson was killed at the Boulby potash mine in East Cleveland in the early hours of today.

ICL UK, which owns the mine, confirmed that Mr Anderson had died following a blow-out – a sudden and powerful release of gas underground..

All other employees were safely evacuated, the firm said. The mine produces potash for use in making fertiliser. Her Majesty’s Mines Inspectorate has been informed.

Mines legislation requires a full investigation, and I need to be reassured that this will indeed happen.

Labour MP Tom Blenkinsop, who represents Middlesbrough South and East Cleveland, has spoken of his concerns following Mr Anderson’s death.

“The miner who had died in the explosion was one of my constituents in East Cleveland.

”My immediate thoughts – and I have no doubt the thoughts of the entire local community – are with his family and friends.

“We cannot allow this death to go unmarked. Over the last decade and a half, the mine has been a safe working environment, certainly compared to years past where accidents were more frequent.

“However, In the space of just a few months we have seen two tragic incidents. I am concerned that this must not become a pattern. Mines legislation requires a full investigation, and I need to be reassured that this will indeed happen.

“I would also want to be reassured that recent redundancies at the mine have not altered day to day working practices to the extent that risk may have been allowed to creep back in. In the near future I will want to meet with both the mine owners, ICL Ltd, and the mine unions on these issues.”

In Febuary, workers at the mine wre send home following the sudden death of a man, 53. Police said the man’s death was not suspicious and a file was prepared for the coroner.

There was an underground fire at the mine in April, which left seven workers affected by smoke and they were taken to hospital for checks.

Last year, the company announced job losses in a “significant restructuring” of its operations, including moving from producing potash to polysulphate fertiliser.

The mine is 1,400m deep and its tunnels go far out under the North Sea.

A spokeswoman for Cleveland Police said: “We can confirm we were called at around 5.20am to an incident at Boulby Potash during which a man has died.

“Police remain at the scene and we are working to understand the circumstances surrounding the incident. Our thoughts are with family, friends and colleagues.”

A spokesman for the company said: ”The incident is believed to have involved a gas blowout – a sudden and powerful release of gas.

“Her Majesty’s Mines Inspectorate has been informed.

”Company staff will be offering all possible support to the man’s family. All other workers in the mine at the time were evacuated safely.“

