UK commuters face travel misery during 24-hour train strike

2016-06-21

Commuters in Scotland and England endured travel misery today as two separate 24-hour strikes resulted in hundreds of trains being cancelled and led to a spike in rush-hour congestion on the roads.

The two walkouts, part of a series of strikes called by the Rail, Maritime and Transport (RMT) union following a dispute over driver-only trains, affected Southern services in London and the South East of England and ScotRail services across Scotland.

Southern, which serves some of the capital’s busiest stations including Victoria and London Bridge, warned of a “significant effect” on services throughout the day.

Some routes were completely closed and on others a limited service ran between 7.30am and 6pm.

“Tens of thousands of our customers will be disrupted and hundreds of our own people will be hit financially”

In Scotland around a third of ScotRail services were unable to run, affecting tens of thousands of passengers.

A total of 15 routes, including Glasgow to Inverness and Edinburgh to Aberdeen, were cancelled while the frequency of other services was cut in half.

Many regular rail commuters chose to travel by car instead, resulting in near-empty train stations and clogged roads.

Traffic Scotland said the roads were much busier than usual, while congestion in Edinburgh city centre also caused significant delays to tram services.

The strikes are the first of seven planned in June and July. The RMT is unhappy about the extension of driver-only trains, which involve the driver closing doors at stations automatically instead of relying on conductors or guards.

Some believe the system is unsafe, while others believe it will spell the end of conductors altogether.

RMT general secretary Mick Cash said both strikes were about ensuring the “safety of passengers and staff” and criticised the train operators’ “drive for ever fatter profits”.

However, ScotRail managing director Phil Verster said the strike was “totally needless” and that the public would be “astonished” to hear that the walkout had been provoked by “who opens and closes doors on trains”.

He added: “The RMT have refused point blank to talk to us about how we modernise and improve Scotland’s railway. Tens of thousands of our customers will be disrupted and hundreds of our own people will be hit financially as a result of their intransigence.”

