Sick of EU referendum? Switzerland has had 180 referendums in the last 20 years

2016-06-23

Tired of the referendum already? Imagine what it’s like to be Swiss.

Up in the Alps, direct democracy holds much more sway than it does in Britain. Switzerland has held nine referendums in 2016 so far, with more on the schedule for September.

Swiss voters rejected a proposal for universal basic income which would have given regular money to everyone in country regardless of their wealth or employment situation.

However, they voted firmly in favour of building a second tunnel beside the Gotthard road tunnel in order to allow the original to be renovated. Some concerned citizens thought the proposal would cost too much, so they put it to the people.

Over the past few decades, they have banned mosque minarets and given themselves a day off on 1 August, as well as rejecting plans to abolish the army and introduce car-free Sundays.

1798

Switzerland has been holding referendums since the 18th century

The Swiss have more referendums than any other nation on earth – by quite a long way – and they’ve been doing it since 1798, when the cantons voted on the constitution of the Helvetic Republic itself.

But other countries also go to the polls more often than the UK. Ireland’s constitution, unlike Britain’s, is written and quite broad. Changing it requires a referendum, so the Irish have to go to the polls in situations that MPs would sort out amongst themselves in the UK.



They’ve had 22 in the past 20 years, far fewer than Switzerland’s 180, but well ahead of Latvia’s 8 (and Britain’s two, as of tomorrow).

They’ve also rerun two referendums in that time, on the EU’s Lisbon and Nice Treaties, approving both on the second attempt.

In the UK, because of the doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty developed over a long power struggle with the monarchy, referendums are not actually legally binding. In theory, MPs could choose to ignore the result of the Brexit referendum or reverse its decision later – although this is extremely unlikely.

