East Belfast residents care less about the EU than access to good local healthcare

2016-06-23

Few people seemed too concerned with the EU referendum vote at the official opening of Bridges Family Practice in east Belfast on the eve of the ballot.

The former Bryson Street Surgery had waited 16 years for the transformation to be completed, thanks in large part to the determination of Dr Christine Hunter and fellow partners, as well as a £1m funding package secured by the Landmark East regeneration project from the Northern Ireland Executive, through the Social Investment Fund.

“This redevelopment is a real example of what can be achieved when communities and governments work together.”

Megan Fearon, Sinn Féin MLA

“Providing the best possible healthcare is a top priority in our recently published Programme for Government Framework and facilities such as this will ensure the health and well-being of the people of east Belfast for years to come,” junior minister Alastair Ross said at the opening on Wednesday.

Sinn Féin’s Megan Fearon, the Northern Ireland Assembly’s youngest MLA aged 24, said the redevelopment is “a real example of what can be achieved when communities and governments work together”.

Located at the end of a 5 metre high peace wall with fence above that runs the length of Bryson Street from the junction of Loyalist Lower Newtownards Road to Madrid Street, in Short Strand, east Belfast’s small republican enclave, the surgery continues to serve both sides of the community, as it has done throughout its 100-year history.

The state-of-the-art modern interior of the new practice stands in contrast to the Loyalist paramilitary murals that can be seen across the road.

“Still no truth, still no justice” reads a painting dedicated to Jimmy McCurrie and Bobbie Neil, protestants killed by IRA snipers in Short Strand’s St Matthew’s Chapel, in June 1980.

Posters extolling the virtues of whether or not the UK should Remain or Leave the EU are nowhere to be seen.

Campaigning by both sides of  the EU divide here has been minimal. Until recently, Northern Ireland had been largely rock solid for Remain, with 75 per cent in favour one poll in February found.

It reflected the amount of political support for staying, with Sinn Féin, the SDLP, the Ulster Unionists, Alliance and the Green Party, as well as the Irish government, campaigning for a remain vote.

Despite the DUP being the only major political party to want to Leave, that support for Remain appears to have shrunk somewhat to between 55 and 60 per cent on the eve of the ballot – although around one in three people said they were undecided.

Northern Ireland is, uniquely for the UK, a net beneficiary of the EU with an estimated contribution of £374m. It received £320m back last year in subsidies for farming and fishing, alongside structural funds.

Special peace and cross-border funds added about £50m, although most of that funding will stop after 2020, while science, education and research funds add another £10m a year.

Former Prime Ministers Tony Blair and John Major appeared together in Derry last month warning that border controls would be introduced between Northern Ireland and the Republic in the event of Brexit.

Taoiseach Enda Kenny said that a new boundary within the island of Ireland would signify a return to “division, isolation and difference”, with the potential to provide “an opportunity for others with malign agendas”.

Back at the Bridges Family Practice, the DUP and Sinn Fein ministers did not want to answer questions on potential ramifications of a Brexit on similar health projects in the future.

“Politicians in Northern Ireland keeping quiet is pretty unique,” one patient said. “Hopefully that may continue whether we stay in the EU or not.”

