The ten TV shows to watch this week

2016-06-17

Series four is available as of this morning, so you should probably cancel any weekend plans in favour of watching the whole lot in bed. We pick up with the inmates of Litchfield Penitentiary – Piper (who’s now something of a big cheese), Alex (who was last seen fighting for her life in the garden shed after revealing the name of her former drug boss) as well as prison guards Daya and Bennett. With new inmates arriving all the time, the prison is becoming dangerously overpopulated and tensions are running very, very high.

They had a massively successful Christmas special, so it’s not all that surprising that the children’s version of Gogglebox is back for an entire series. Now that the original adult families have become vaguely well-known themselves, it’s refreshing to have some new subjects who are much less aware of the cameras (which might also, of course, be because they’re children). We hear their opinions on the week’s biggest news stories – the best of which comes from Molly, talking about Donald Trump: “He’s fat and he has crazy hair.” And there’s also a range of television from the past months, which provides a useful catch-up. While many of the kids are moved by Nadya Hussain’s winner’s speech on The Great British Bake Off, another girl tells her brother, “I’m gonna cry now.” “Happy tears?” he guesses. “No, sad. I didn’t want her to win, I didn’t like her cakes.”

3 EUROTRASH
Fri 9pm Channel 4

More help for the befuddled Brexit mind, in the shape of this special episode of 1990s “culture” show Eurotrash. With the European Referendum less than a week away, Antoine de Caunes and Jean Paul Gaultier are back to remind us of the delights our Continental cousins have to offer. Guests range from Pricasso, who paints with his penis, and a Spanish psychic who can read the future in fruit and vegetables, to a man who can turn himself into a unicorn. Is there anything among that lot which would even begin to make you want to vote Leave?

4 MUM
Fri 9pm BBC2

It’s by far the best comedy – if not the best thing – that’s been on television this year, but this week sees Mum come to a close. Having followed Cathy (played to perfection by Lesley Manville) for the past 12 months as she comes to terms with the death of her husband, the series has now reached New Year’s Eve. Cathy’s party is interrupted by Kelly and Jason’s argument. Michael turns up, and as Cathy is trying to sort out Jason’s row and keep her party at least a tiny bit upbeat, she tries to find the right moment to give him his Christmas present.

5 PROFESSOR GREEN: DANGEROUS DOGS
Tues BBC Three

The UK rapper – real name Stephen Manderson – has made quite an interesting, and successful, segue into documentary-making for BBC Three. His latest is about dogs that are considered dangerous or are illegal. He tells us that in the UK over the past decade, 26 people have been killed by dogs, and hospitalisations have risen by 76 per cent. Manderson sets out to challenge perceptions of what we consider to be dangerous breeds and, as a bull-breed owner himself, looks at the prejudice that exists against status dogs and their owners.

6 EU REFERENDUM: THE GREAT DEBATE
Tues 8pm BBC1

It’s almost here, honestly – just a few more days to get through. And who better to guide the final hours of judgement time than David Dimbleby? The king of live-voting-based broadcast will be joined by Mishal Husain and Emily Maitlis live from Wembley for the BBC’s last and biggest debate ahead of the referendum. Thousands of viewers will be invited to put their questions to representatives from the Leave and Remain camps. The BBC is not dwelling on the fact that this is a format which was predicted by Chris Morris’s satirical comedy The Day Today in 1994, when it featured a special episode of Question Time filmed live from Wembley…

7 BORN ON THE SAME DAY
Tues 9pm Channel 4

This new history series looks at key moments in the parallel lives of three people born on the same day in the same year, exploring how their lives entwine with the major events of our time. This episode tells the stories of the first supermodel, Twiggy; campaigner against hate crimes Sylvia Swain; and Anne Smith, who uncovered a family secret that was hidden for 50 years.

8 MR V MRS: CALL THE MEDIATOR
Tues 9pm BBC2

It’s an element of the modern family that’s rarely discussed: while separations and divorces are more and more common, there isn’t often an insight into how the aftermath is handled. This documentary series aims to change that as the door is opened on the network of National Family Mediation and the services they provide to couples who are trying to resolve often furious disputes over money, children and property after a split. This first episode follows Sue and Peter, who are trying to split their money and home after Sue left Peter for another relationship. Meanwhile, Jason and Vicki haven’t spoken a word to each other for six months though they are co-parenting a child.

9 THE BORDER
 Tues 10pm Channel 4

This thriller about a Polish border-guard unit is the first drama from the country ever to air on Channel 4, showing as part of Walter Presents, the foreign-language showcase which brought us Deutschland 83. Rebrow, the captain of the border unit, is the only survivor of a bomb attack. Injured and shattered at the loss of his friends and girlfriend, and suspected of masterminding the tragedy himself, he becomes desperate to clear his name and to find out who is responsible, and so begins his own investigation.

10 THE HAND OF GOD; 30 YEARS ON
Weds 10.15pm ITV 4

During the 1986 World Cup quarter-final between Argentina and England, four years after the countries had gone to war over the Falkland Islands, Diego Maradona scored two of the most famous goals in football history, one quite brilliant, one rather more nefarious. Thirty years on, this documentary marks the occasion as six of the England team who played on that day – Glenn Hoddle, Peter Shilton, Terry Butcher, Gary Lineker, Steve Hodge and Kenny Sansom – reunite to discuss what happened during the most talked-about World Cup game
of all time.

