Andrew Lilico: My break-up letter to the peoples of Europe

2016-06-22

Many advocates of remaining would like all of you that live across the Channel to believe that Britain’s desire to leave is driven by historical clichéd enmities, a general hatred of the EU or a desire for Britain to withdraw from engagement with the world. There are of course some such sentiments, as there are in many parts of Europe and the US. But that is not what the Brexit debate is really about.

Most of the main public supporters of leaving the EU have believed in the UK’s membership until the past three or four years, and many could have been persuaded to stay if a reformed relationship had been available. But David Cameron did not ask for any such reform and you (quite rightly) would not have offered it to him if he had.

The reality is that although the UK has been an important EU member for 40 years – and we have achieved marvellous things together in this partnership – nothing good lasts for ever and the UK’s membership was always going to be time-limited once we chose not to join the euro.

Together we faced down the Warsaw Pact, showing that Western Europe did not always need the US to oppose Communists. We absorbed the post-dictatorship Iberian countries and Greece. We absorbed post-Communist Eastern Europe, locking in liberal democracy. These were fantastic, historically significant achievements. Along the way, we like to believe we have influenced your thinking about economics and regulation, converting you to a philosophy based around competition, free trade, market liberalisation, and opposition to state aid.

But these are our joint achievements of the past, and we cannot repeat them. You have moved on with the European project to other exciting, dangerous and inspiring things, to places we cannot follow.

Today’s Europe is about the euro and Schengen and how to move forward from them. There are Britons who believe these are bad things in themselves, but for many others the point is not that the euro or Schengen are mistakes for you. It is that they would not be right for us.

You will need to move on further to make the euro and Schengen work properly. We see that, and we no longer want to be in the way, forever complaining and holding things up. You will need a European treasury, with European taxes and debts, to make the euro work properly.

You will need border guards and a European FBI to police and enforce Schengen. You will need an elected European President to oversee these things and to be accountable for them. We wish you luck with these grand, inspiring schemes. They have the potential to establish Europe as a great world power. That new power can be an ally and asset to the UK. We do not wish to draw away from you.

But as you move on to your projects of tomorrow, we in Britain need to do the same. Out beyond Europe the UK can enter into new partnerships and alliances, by ourselves, that would not work either for you or our new partners.

We have cultural and historical links with countries such as Canada and Australia that could allow us to become closer to them than you ever could, or would want to be. We might cut new trade deals with Japan or the US that could break the complex impasses that have bedevilled recent EU trade negotiations.

Perhaps we might learn new things we could then teach you, and vice versa. New challenges such as climate change, digital technologies or the commercial exploitation of space might benefit from our having greater regulatory freedom. Once we know the best answers, perhaps we can share them with you again, tomorrow.

Britain’s experience in the EU has been great and we would hate for anything to alienate us from you. But it is time for us to move on, in both our interests and yours.

