After the victory he has fought 25 years for, what next for Nigel Farage and Ukip?

2016-06-24

It was the moment the majority of Leave supporters had spent the last two months campaigning towards. For Nigel Farage the announcement that the UK had voted for Brexit was the culmination of half a lifetime’s work.

The night started with the Ukip leader “conceding” defeat, having glimpsed the private polls that City of London financial institutions spent £500,000 a time on to gauge which way the electorate was going to go. The Remain camp had “probably edged it” he said.

“We have done it without having to fight, we have done it without a bullet being fired.”

Nigel Farage in his Brexit victory speech

Then the knife-edge Newcastle result came in and Mr Farage “unconceded”. It sounded ridiculous but he did not care. All that mattered was the result. When the time came to face the cameras to acknowledge the public’s decision, one he had been fighting for since co-founding Ukip in 1993, there was only going to be one approach.

In typical Farage fashion, it was a speech lauded as “barnstorming” by his devoted supporters but denounced as crass and crossing the boundaries of decency by others.

“We have done it without having to fight, we have done it without a bullet being fired,” he said, instantly forgetting the murder of Jo Cox, the pro-EU Labour MP who represented Batley and Spen. “Dare to dream that the dawn is breaking on an independent nation.

“This is a victory for ordinary people, for good people, for decent people. The people who’ve had enough of the merchant bankers.”

The triumphant approach by Mr Farage, himself a former commodities dealer with many friends in the City he relies on for financial support, typified his bombastic approach. It has served him so well as euroscepticism eventually took hold in the UK over the last two decades and ultimately flourished. The question facing him now is: what next?

An 8th attempt to become a Westminster MP is inevitable, given he told reporters he would “try 80 times” if necessary.

And he was given a boost in his attempts to do so earlier this month when it emerged his defeat by Tory MP Craig Mackinlay could be void. A judge threw out a bid to block the police from extending their expenses probe into the South Thanet general election campaign, leading to a full investigation.

The chance to overturn the 2,812 Tory majority may arrive well before 2020 and he will want to build on the battering Ukip has given Labour in the latter’s traditional northern bases.

“I think it was morally the wrong thing to do. Using a picture of people who had fled from the war in Syria going to Slovakia… had nothing to do with the United Kingdom.”

Ukip MP Douglas Carswell on Nigel Farage’s Brexit immigration poster

Although his party secured more than four million votes last May, the result yielded just a single MP, Douglas Carswell, busily building a profile as the more “acceptable” face of Ukip.

That itself throws up a sub-plot as the pair clearly cannot stand each other. Mr Carswell, one of the first guests on the BBC’s referendum night coverage, repeatedly denounced the infamous poster unveiled by Mr Farage on the morning of Jo Cox’s murder, showing a line of Syrian refugees trying to enter Slovenia. Their rivalry will continue to simmer.

Eurosceptic parties in other EU countries may also be seeking his services, as he hinted in his victory speech describing similar movements calling for change in the Netherlands, Denmark and even Italy.

He may want the referendum day, June 23, to be declared a bank holiday, saying that it will “go down in our history as our independence day”, but there is little chance of Nigel Farage putting his feet up and relaxing anytime soon.

