Divided Kingdom? Brexit vote brutally exposes the fault lines in British society

2016-06-24

Amid the mud and mirth of the Glastonbury Festival, the sense of schism was not hard to unearth yesterday. This coming together of youth and vibrancy was spiced with a new and bitter tang of resentment at the fruit born overnight from conflicting views of Britain.

Rachel Hawkins, 25, doubtless spoke for many of her cohort – their youthful zeal already sorely tested by the financial crisis- when she said she was “devastated” by Brexit. Some 75 per cent of 18 to 24-year-olds voted to remain in the European Union – the figure for those aged 65 and over was 39 per cent.

Ms Hawkins, a graduate from North Wales, said: “We’re the generation who are all trying to get jobs post 2008. We’re all in young adulthood and we just finally started to feel like we were getting somewhere, and now our generation is going through another recession – the same difficulty again. I’m just a bit speechless.”

Before trudging off, she predicted a presidential election victory for Donald Trump and dubbed 2016 “the Year of the Apocalypse”. 

“I think we are going to feel the effects of Brexit in all sorts of areas that we are not even thinking about at the moment and I think it’s going to take several years for that to become apparent.”

Dr Robert Saunders, Queen Mary University of London

Colourful over-statement perhaps but in the fields of Somerset clear voice was being given nonetheless to the harsh fault lines that spread out across the United Kingdom in the early hours of yesterday with all the skyscraper-swallowing ferocity of an earthquake sequence in a disaster movie.

Here is a nation now divided along multiple lines – from the hefty majority of degree-holding urbanites who voted to remain to the unemployed in blighted communities who grabbed the opportunity to leave; from the armies of youth who embraced Brussels to the babyboomers who decided to believe in taking back control; and from the capital city which overwhelmingly backed an interwoven Europe to the vast swathes of the English and Welsh shires which decided emphatically it was not for them.

From Brixton to Bristol, the Remain campaign dominated in Britain’s more dynamic metropolitan centres as well as in Scotland and Northern Ireland, where the EU is regarded as a positive influence on national well-being.

As a conurbation which has hitherto served as the EU’s financial clearing house and thrived on its status as a global hub, London unsurprisingly led the In vote – seven of the ten areas with the highest share for Remain were in the capital. Edinburgh registered 74 per cent support for remain.

Yet it seemed that the further the English population settled from the M25 and Hadrian’s Wall, the more it backed Brexit. Britain’s strongest out vote came from the Lincolnshire town Boston (75.6 per cent) – ahead even of the eurosceptic Essex heartlands of Thurrock and Castle Point. Of the nine areas that voted by over 70 per cent for Leave, five were in Eastern England.

But this was not a simple town versus country, internationalist versus traditionalist portioning of the UK’s europhile/europhobe tendencies.

A large chunk of London’s eastern reaches voted Out, alongside university cities such as Sheffield and Swansea. Britain’s most pro-Brexit region was the densely-packed, diverse West Midlands.

Nor, of course, was the divide party political. Gathered around the triumphant St George Cross of Leave were every bit as many dyed-in-the-wool Labour voters from its working class heartlands as tweedy Tories from the Home Counties.

Of 113 council areas controlled by Labour, 75 voted for out. Leave was also the overwhelming verdict from local authority areas with an unemployment rate of eight per cent or more.

Here, it seems, is an anarchic rupture between the ruled and the rulers, strivers and that newly-benighted breed, experts. This was an atypically revolutionary rebellion from an English race who George Orwell once observed “feel no need for any philosophy or systematic ‘worldview’.”

Robert Saunders, an lecturer in modern British history at Queen Mary University of London, said: “The chasm between the views of the electorate and the people they have been voting for has been pretty brutally exposed. What happened last night was a national vote of no confidence not just in David Cameron, but in MPs, trade unions, big business, in universities, economists and experts of all kinds.”

For now at least polarisation is indeed the order of the day. Eileen Corder, 57, from Dorset, said: “I think a lot of it is to do with all these immigrants being allowed in. That’s what swayed me, anyway. There’s too many people coming into this country.”

Among the myriad Twitter hashtags spawned by yesterday’s result was “#DividedKingdom”. Messages using it included “Hey Britain, have you considered building a Wall and blowing up Eurotunnel?”

And so the knotty problem remains of how to try to reconcile such division – an issue for which there were yesterday few answers. Former shadow business secretary Chuka Umunna said: “The challenge for us as policy makers, as politicians, is how do we knit together our society after this division?”

The absence of an immediate blueprint to glue Britain back together after such a far-reaching societal fracture is understandable, not least since it is argued its full extent is not yet even understood.

Dr Saunders said: “I think we are going to feel the effects of Brexit in all sorts of areas that we are not even thinking about at the moment and I think it’s going to take several years for that to become apparent.”

Meanwhile, in a patchwork of muddy fields in Somerset, there was a sense that such is the enormity of this painful contemplation, it would just have wait a little longer.

Jonnie Bevan, 21, from Leave-voting Coventry, said: “Glastonbury’s vision of unity doesn’t really seem to fit with this. We’ve said we are just going to not think about it for the moment. We are here to enjoy ourselves so we will deal with the reality on Monday.”

 

