Europe: the Tory running sore that has brought Britain to the brink of Brexit

2016-06-23

Britain’s relationship with Europe has been a running sore for the Conservative Party from the moment that Edward Heath led the country into the Common Market in 1973.

At the time Tory leaders overwhelmingly backed the move, and an estimated 85 per cent of their voters approved British membership in the referendum that followed two years later.

One of the party’s most gifted orators, Enoch Powell, had already walked out of the party in protest over the move.

The party’s long-standing tensions over Europe have been dramatically highlighted during the campaign as the rival sides slugged it out in “blue on blue” combat.

His stance on Europe reflected a strand of thinking within the party – believing the UK should prioritise its historic relationship with the Commonwealth over forging new ties on the Continent – that dated back to the late 1950s.

It was still there, in a stubborn minority, when Margaret Thatcher took over from Heath as party leader.

She was initially a committed supporter of membership and as Prime Minister signed the Single European Act which paved the way to the single market.

However, she also began to develop fiercely Eurosceptic attitudes that were to prove her political downfall a decade later.

After a four-year battle she secured the rebate on Britain’s payments to the EU that still applies today and in 1988 delivered the so-called Bruges Speech denouncing the emergence of a “European super-state exercising a new dominance from Brussels”.

Two years later she tore into the expansionist ambitions of the European Commission president, Jacques Delors, famously telling MPs: “No, no, no”.

Her drift towards Euroscepticism (and the government’s collapse in popularity) had been watched with growing dismay by a majority of her Europhile Cabinet and her Commons outburst lit the fuse of rebellion.

Geoffrey Howe, the deputy Prime Minister, walked out and delivered a devastating resignation speech, which prompted Michael Heseltine to challenge her.

Within weeks she had gone and had been replaced by John Major, who struggled during a troubled premiership to contain the hostility of a dogged band of Eurosceptic backbenchers.

His time in Downing Street was plagued by near-civil war over the UK’s relationship to Europe, most spectactularly over whether Britain should sign the Maastricht Treaty forging closer ties within the EU.

The internecine strife led to nine serial rebels losing the Tory whip and Mr Major being caught on camera complaining there were three “bastards” sitting round his Cabinet table.

In the background Margaret Thatcher and her loyal lieutenant Norman Tebbit were stoking up the tensions of an increasingly divided and fractious party.

In 13 wilderness years of opposition, the Tories’ ideological split over Europe did not fade, but were just less prominent as William Hague and Iain Duncan Smith struggled to make a political impact.

The election as leader of the latter, who orchestrated much of the anti-Major sniping, over Europhile Kenneth Clarke illustrated how much the party in the country had shifted to the anti-EU camp.

When David Cameron succeeded Michael Howard as leader, he warned activists that they needed to stop “banging on” about Europe.

But he still partly owed his election to convincing the party faithful that he was Eurosceptic at heart.

His hopes that the issue would tumble down the party’s political pecking-order were realised for several years, but the stunning rise of Ukip and its success in attracting Tory members and voters unnerved Mr Cameron ahead of the election.

Under pressure from anti-EU MPs, who now comprise nearly half of Tory backbenchers, he finally caved into demands to hold the membership referendum that some of the party’s old-timers have been craving for decades.

The party’s long-standing tensions over Europe have been dramatically highlighted during the campaign as the rival sides slugged it out in “blue on blue” combat.

Calling the referendum was a tactical move to shore up Conservative support ahead of the election, but it may have inflicted fatal wounds on Tory unity. And it brought Britain to the brink of heading for the EU exit.

