Sadiq Khan lays into Boris Johnson: ‘You’re running project hate’

2016-06-21

The London Mayor Sadiq Khan has accused his predecessor, Boris Johnson, of running “project hate” by putting immigration at the heart of the pro-Brexiteers’ case for withdrawal from the European Union.

The fiercest clashes of the referendum campaign’s final televised debate came as the rival camps exchanged blows over the scale of migration to Britain.

Mr Khan said: “Your campaign hasn’t been project fear. It’s been project hate as far as immigration is concerned.”

Attacking his opponents for “unnecessary invective”, Mr Johnson retorted: “I’m a passionate believer in immigration, but it has got to be controlled.”

He hit back at his successor by quoting a previous warning from Mr Khan that politicians were too quick in the past to dismiss concerns about immigration.

“Your campaign hasn’t been project fear. It’s been project hate as far as immigration is concerned.”

Sadiq Khan

During the BBC1 debate from Wembley Arena, Mr Khan said Leave campaigners were telling “big fat lies” by claiming Turkey could be about to join the Union.

He produced a Leave leaflet showing Turkey on a map, but only naming neighbouring countries Iraq and Syria.

“That’s scaremongering, Boris, you should be ashamed. You are using the ruse of Turkey to scare people to vote Leave.”

The pro-Brexit Labour MP Gisela Stuart said she wanted to “know who the real David Cameron is”, saying the Prime Minister was promoting Turkish accession at the same time as insisting Turkey will not join until the year 3000.

She added there were 50,000 missing primary school places in the West Midlands as uncontrolled EU migration made it impossible to plan public services.

Mr Khan said: “Immigration has got to be controlled, but leaving the EU isn’t the answer.”

Andrea Leadsom, the pro-Brexit energy minister, shot back: “Yes it is.”

The TUC general secretary Frances O’Grady, who paid tribute to the role of migrants in running the National Health Service, said: “The Leave campaign are selling people a big con. They’ve never promised to reduce numbers.”

Remain campaigners repeatedly argued that leaving the European single market would leave Britain out in the cold.

Ruth Davidson, the Tory Scottish leader, claimed they were “utterly irresponsible” for advocating moves that could result in UK firms facing tariffs.

Boris Johnson retorted that Britain receives around one-fifth of German motor manufacturing exports and added: “Would they be so insane as impose tariffs on us?”

Ms Leadsom insisted Britain could create new free trade deals with non-EU nations.

She said 80 per cent of the world’s economy was not in the single market and the EU was taking 10 years to negotiate trade agreements.

“Why? Because 28 member states cannot even organise a takeaway curry let alone what they’re going to do on free trade with the rest of the world.”

Mr Johnson said Britain has been unable to protect steel jobs partly because of EU rules.

But Mr Khan accused him of lying, forcing presenter David Dimbleby to intervene to tell the pair to “calm down”.

