How would Britain rejoin the EU?

2016-06-21

There will be no short-term or medium-term prospect of returning to the European Union if Britain votes for Brexit on Thursday. Politically, the issue would have been settled for a generation.

Were a future government to decide it wanted to rejoin the club, the UK would have to apply all over again.

Its application would be considered under criteria set down in 1993 when the bloc had just 12 members.

The current rules require member states to have stable democratic institutions, a commitment to the rule of law, a “functioning market economy” and evidence that it respects human rights and protects minority groups.

It has to accept that its laws need to be brought in line with EU legislation.

Member states are also required to adhere to “the aims of political, economic and monetary union”.

This stipulation means that upon reapplying Britain would need to commit itself to the principle of joining the single currency and to signing up to the Schengen Agreement, which scrapped border controls within the EU.

The UK would, of course, no longer be entitled to the annual rebate on payments to Brussels negotiated in 1984 by the Thatcher government.

It has taken around a decade for recent new member states – mainly drawn from central and eastern Europe – to be accepted into the fold.

In the event of rejoining, Britain might hope to move more quickly.

Under the process for membership, a candidate initially signs an association agreement to help it prepare its application.

This is followed by a formal application, leading to detailed talks between the European Commission and the prospective member over its readiness to join and the compatibility of its laws with EU legislation.

Discussions focus on 35 policy fields, such as transport, energy and the environment, as well as how much the new member is likely to pay into and receive from the EU budget and how quickly the new rules can be phased in.

The process can be laborious: Turkey still only has reached agreement on one of the 35 ‘chapters’ despite being a membership candidate since 1999.

Once the negotiations have been completed, a treaty of accession is signed (with a date when membership begins) which then has to be ratified by every member state. A single country retains the ability to block any application.

