Brexit decision costs PM his job and sends shock across world

2016-06-24

Britain’s momentous decision to turn its back on the European Union sent political shock-waves around the world, plunged international financial markets into turmoil and forced an emotional David Cameron to announce his resignation.

The vote for Brexit marks a turning-point for the nation. It is arguably the most significant moment in the UK’s history since the end of the Second World War as well as its biggest constitutional change since the division of Ireland.

It reopened the issue of independence for Scotland after a strong vote for Remain north of the border, and raised questions over the status of Northern Ireland, which also opposed Brexit.

The Conservatives face a summer leadership contest to choose Mr Cameron’s successor, with former London Mayor Boris Johnson and Home Secretary Theresa May seen as the obvious frontrunners.

The recriminations over the result, which highlighted social and geographical divisions within the UK, also plunged Jeremy Corbyn into his worst crisis as Labour leader.

The final tally of votes gave Leave 51.9 per cent of the vote, with Remain on 48.1 per cent, as pro-Brexit sentiment swept huge parts of the UK apart from London, Scotland and Northern Ireland.

The outcome stunned Downing Street and pro-EU campaigners who had been cautiously optimistic when the polls closed that they were on course for a narrow victory.

Within hours of the result’s confirmation, Mr Cameron appeared on the Downing Street doorstep with his wife Samantha to say he would remain in office for three months to “steady the ship” and then hand over to a new Prime Minister.

The result made headlines across the world and Europe’s leaders held emergency talks over how to respond, urging Britain to start the exit process “as soon as possible, however painful that may be”.

Their demand for Britain to trigger immediately Article 50, which begins the formal process of withdrawal from the EU, puts them at odds with Mr Johnson and Michael Gove, the leaders of the Leave campaign, who have argued there is no need to take that irreversible step straightaway.

The presidents of the European council, commission and parliament – Donald Tusk, Jean-Claude Juncker and Martin Schulz respectively – also ruled out any prospect of a last-minute move to renegotiate Britain’s relationship with the EU as a potential alternative.

The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, and French President François Hollande (above), both expressed deep regret at the decision.

The German newspaper Die Welt reported that a government strategy paper recommended that Germany, in co-ordination with the EU, offer Britain “constructive exit negotiations” aimed at making the UK an “associated partner country”.

It also said Germany feared that France, the Netherlands, Austria, Finland and Hungary could also seek to leave the EU in the wake of the British vote.

The vote sent the value of major companies plunging, as 7 per cent was wiped off the value of the FTSE 100 Index before it recovered around half of its initial losses.

Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, said it was ready to provide £250bn to shore up the financial system.

In Scotland, which voted by 62 per cent to 38 per cent to Remain, the First Minister Nicola Sturgeon said a second independence referendum was “highly likely”.

She said it was “democratically unacceptable” for Scotland to be forced out of the bloc against its will and announced her administration would start drawing up legislation to enable another independence referendum to be held.

Meanwhile, Sinn Fein’s Martin McGuinness demanded a referendum on a “united Ireland” after Northern Ireland rejected Brexit.

Mr Johnson said the vote would give Britain a “glorious opportunity” for a brighter future, and insisted the UK would be “a greater European power”.

Mr Corbyn faced resignation demands from senior Labour MPs, who bitterly criticised his performance during the campaign. At least ten have signalled they would support a no-confidence vote.

