Violence and intimidation a part of working life for Westminster MPs

2016-06-16

Extreme violence of the nature inflicted on Jo Cox remains rare but for many MPs physical assault and intimidation are an increasingly disturbing fact of life.

A student was jailed for a minimum of 15 years in 2010 for stabbing Labour MP Stephen Timms at a constituency surgery in Newham, east London. Roshonara Choudhry, an English undergraduate, was found guilty of attempted murder after saying the attack was “revenge” for Mr Timms voting for the invasion of Iraq.

The attempted slaying came a decade after an aide to former Liberal Democrat MP Nigel Jones was stabbed to death as he tried to protect the politician from an attack with a samurai sword by a mentally ill constituent.

Such violence is exceptional but it emerged earlier this year that for hundreds of MPs abuse and aggression from voters is a rising phenomenon.

A study by psychiatrists published in January revealed that 192 out of 239 Westminster MPs who responded to a survey had experienced aggressive or intrusive behaviour from constituents.

A total of 43 said they had suffered physical attack or attempted assault while 36 said campaigns of abuse had left them afraid to go out in public. Some 101 said they had received threats of harm and 52 faced threats of property damage.

Many detailed death threats or other intimidation, including one who was told to “keep an eye on your children”. Comments from MPs who took part in the study included: “Pulled a knife on me in the surgery”; “repeatedly punched me in the face”; “came at me with a hammer’; “hit with a brick”; “shot with air rifle”, “petrol poured through letter box” and “threat to kill me by telephone at home – call taken by my seven-year-old daughter”.

“It is an unavoidable part of the job that we meet constituents in lots of unsecured locations”

Gavin Barwell

Politicians reported that the attention from some voters had brought one marriage close to breakdown because of the persistent attentions of a female constituent while others were treated for anxiety and depression following threats received at their homes.

The study, overseen by the Fixated Threat Assessment Centre (FTAC), which looks at threats to high-profile figures such as the Royal Family, led to calls for greater protection for MPs.

Conservative Tim Loughton, speaking at the time, said protection for MPs was “woefully inadequate”.

He said: “MPs get no added security. Just because we have lots of police with guns in Westminster doesn’t mean we are safe wherever we go.”

“MPs get no added security. Just because we have lots of police with guns in Westminster doesn’t mean we are safe wherever we go”

Tim Loughton

The shooting of Mrs Cox follows a number of incidents in recent days.

Glasgow East MP Natalie McGarry was this week advised by police to increase security at her constituency office after receiving messages online threatening murder and rape.

Ms McGarry, who was briefly detained during a visit to Turkey in February, said she was aware of at least two other female MPs who had received hundreds of threats of sexual violence after speaking out on subjects including online bullying.

But other MPs said that meeting members of the public was fundamental to their job and the threat of violence could never be entirely eliminated. 

Gavin Barwell, a Conservative whip who was threatened outside his constituency office in Croydon last week, said: “It is an unavoidable part of the job that we meet constituents in lots of unsecured locations – on the streets, fairs, meetings. Unless you sort of lock MPs away from the public, which would be a terrible thing for our democracy, you can’t remove the threat unfortunately.”

Mr Timms, who required life-saving surgery to survive his injuries, turned down an offer to have a knife-detecting arch installed in his office.

Shadow policing minister Jack Dromey said MPs must not be intimidated from doing their jobs. He said: “What we cannot allow to happen is for savagery of this kind to stop the democratic process of members of Parliament doing their job because that is what the people expect.”

