DNA revelations hand Scottish baronetcy to an accountant – and other titles may be at risk

2016-06-20

A Home Counties accountant has won the legal right to inherit a Scottish baronetcy in a case which could herald wider use of DNA testing to resolve disputes over aristocratic titles.

The unusual dispute between Murray Pringle, 74, and his second cousin, businessman Simon Pringle, required the intervention of the Queen after both men laid claim to the title of baronet of Stichill.

“This case could have far-reaching implications for titled families facing a challenge over succession.”

Andrew Keefe, lawyer

Seven judges on the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council were asked by Buckingham Palace to rule on the case after Murray Pringle complained that DNA evidence showed that he rather than Simon was the rightful heir to the title, named after a village in Roxburghshire.

The judges, who normally sits as justices in the Supreme Court, ruled that they were entitled to take the DNA evidence into account and duly ruled that the title, which differs from a peerage and does not pass automatically between heirs, should be transferred to Murray Pringle.

The dispute had it roots in findings from the DNA which showed that Simon Pringle’s late father, Sir Steuart Pringle, a former Royal Marines commander and the 10th baronet, had been the unwitting beneficiary of a “break in the line of paternity” in the previous generation.

“DNA evidence [can] reopen a family succession many generations into the past”

Judges

The DNA sample, gathered as part of a genealogy exercise, showed to “a high degree of probability” that Sir Steurat’s father, Norman Pringle, was the secret lovechild of another man. The baronetcy of Stichill was formally granted by Charles II in 1683 to a Pringle forebear and subsequent “male heirs from his body”.

The judges ruled the title should therefore pass to Murray Pringle, from High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, whose lineage as the grandson of the eighth baronet was accepted.

In their ruling, the judges acknowledged that the acceptance of DNA evidence in inheritance disputes could have far-reaching implications by revealing extra-marital liaisons in aristocratic circles previously assumed to be unprovable and long buried in the past. 

The judges said: “DNA evidence [can] reopen a family succession many generations into the past. Whether this is a good thing and whether legal measures are needed to protect property transactions in the past, the rights of the perceived beneficiary of a trust of property, and the long established expectations of a family, are questions for others to consider.”

Andrew Keefe, a lawyer specialising in inheritance issues, added: “This case could have far-reaching implications for titled families facing a challenge over succession.”

Simon Pringle, who is in his 50s and lives in Hastings, East Sussex, was gracious in accepting defeat in the case, which had been fought at the cost of each side.

He said: “I want to congratulate Murray for winning the verdict and express the hope that he and his successors will wear the title as honourably as my father. This was a horrible ordeal for my parents and the result is the opposite of the one they would have wanted.”

