Leave or Remain? How newspapers are covering the EU referendum

2016-06-17

Many newspapers have chosen to take sides in the upcoming referendum, campaigning either for Leave or Remain.

Of all the papers, the i and The Times were the least partisan in their coverage, according to analysis by Press Gazette.

The media magazine looked at the front pages of British national newspapers since May 23, and determined whether they featured stories that supported Remain, Leave or neither. The i and The Times were judged to be the most balanced. Both papers published an equal number of pro-Remain and pro-Leave stories over that period.



These figures were then weighted for circulation (see graph above). In total, 46% of all papers sold featured a story that was biased either way on its front page. Of those, some three quarters were in favour of Leave, and one quarter for Remain. The study concluded that there was “a strong bias in UK press news coverage against remaining in the EU”.

This is in large part due to the strongly Eurosceptic slant of the nation’s two best-selling dailies, The Sun and The Daily Mail. As well as having smaller circulations, the more typically Europhile publications, such as The Guardian and The Daily Mirror, have been less skewed in their coverage.

While the Leave camp has dominated media coverage, the balance can change radically from day to day. On June 15 pro-Remain stories were more common, as George Osborne’s warnings of a post-Brexit emergency budget made headlines. The following day, there were no clearly pro-Remain stories at all.



Given that polls are placing the two sides almost neck and neck, this press bias cannot be said to reflect public opinion in general. The extent to which it reflects the views of newspaper readers, and to which it influences them, has been a highly emotive issue during the campaign.

In March, Sun editor Tony Gallagher said that he commissioned research which found that his readership “was pretty hostile to the European project”. He added that this “has guided some of our thinking editorially”.

On the other hand, fears that the media will unfairly skew the result have been expressed on both sides of the debate. In March Alastair Campbell, Tony Blair’s former director of communications, denounced most pro-Leave papers as “propaganda sheets”. Meanwhile, Eurosceptics often accuse the constitutionally impartial BBC of bias toward Remain.

