Tim Peake would return to space ‘in a heartbeat’

2016-06-21

By Sarah Cassidy

British astronaut Tim Peake has told of the heart-stopping moment when he feared that his spacecraft’s main parachute had failed to open as it plummeted towards Earth.

Speaking at his first press conference since leaving the International Space Station (ISS) and landing in Kazakhstan on Saturday, Major Peake revealed how he had watched the clock as he waited in the tiny Soyuz capsule for the deployment of the module’s huge main parachute – vital for a survivable landing.

The deployment of the initial parachutes, designed to steady and slow the capsule ready for the launch of the main parachute, was a violent experience, he recalled.

“You get about 20 seconds where the capsule is being completely flung around and you just have to really hold on and wait for it all to stop,” he said.

“I thought if we didn’t have a main parachute open, he wouldn’t be looking as cool as that”

Tim Peake

A former helicopter test pilot, Major Peake had been led to expect a big jolt, but it never came. Instead, the parachute opened gently and unnoticed.

“I wasn’t even aware that the main chute had opened, and the clock was running,” said the astronaut.

“For a second I was concerned. I looked across to Yuri [the spacecraft commander] and he was just sitting there, so relaxed and cool as he always is. I thought if we didn’t have a main parachute open, he wouldn’t be looking as cool as that.”

Major Peake gave a vivid account of his return to Earth including ha description of his tiny Soyuz capsule “tumbling” in space, watching a pyrotechnic display of sparks and flames during the fiery descent through the Earth’s atmosphere, and the sensation of “falling back to Earth” as the building G-force pushed him back in his seat.

Despite the dangers, he said he would return to space “in a heartbeat”.

The astronaut looked well and relaxed at the press conference, in marked contrast to his demeanour during the first minutes, indeed hours after landing, when he was unable to walk unaided.

He said readjusting to being back on Earth had been harder and taken longer than adapting to life in space, but added: “It’s amazing how quickly the human body adapts to a new environment. Even just after three days, I’m feeling fantastic.”

He also spoke of his “dream” of going to the Moon, his hope that the UK continues to fund manned space missions – and his relief at using a gravity-assisted Earth toilet at last.

The 44-year-old father of two ­returned after a six-month European Space Agency mission on the ISS with American Nasa astronaut Colonel Tim Kopra and Russian cosmonaut Yuri Malenchenko.

Their “descent module” – the only part of the three-section Soyuz TMA-19M spacecraft to complete the journey – parachuted down on to a remote spot on the vast Kazakhstan steppe at 10.15am UK time on Saturday.

