EU referendum: Latest polls show results on a knife edge

2016-06-21

The rival camps in the battle over Brexit will mount a frantic 48 final hours of campaigning amid fresh evidence that the outcome of the European Union membership referendum remains too close to call.

The latest opinion poll put Remain on 53 per cent and Leave on 47 per cent – a finding that confirms the result is on a knife edge.

NatCen Social Research, the social research organisation which conducted the survey, said the prospect of a Leave victory could not be ruled out.

Kirby Swales, the director of NatCen’s research centre, said: “These findings suggest the public is fairly evenly split. While we have Remain slightly ahead, there is everything to play for in the final days of the campaign.”

Its survey was conducted using methods recommended by the inquiry into the failure pollsters to forecast last year’s general election result.

“While we have Remain slightly ahead, there is everything to play for in the final days of the campaign”

NatCen

After a surge for Leave last week in the polls last week, recent surveys have suggested backing for the EU has recovered to put the two sides on level pegging.

The pound recorded its largest one-day rise against the pound for seven years in response to the latest surveys, while share prices recorded their steepest rise for ten months.

A Vote Leave spokesman said: “Four months ago, four weeks ago, people said we didn’t have a chance and now it’s neck and neck. Now it’s vital that our voters get out on Thursday and for people to ignore David Cameron’s deeply discredited scaremongering.”

A spokesman for Britain Stronger in Europe said “It’s very close and there is everything to play for, as I have thought for some time that it would be. So we need to spend every spare minute campaigning.”

“These next few hours will shape Britain’s future for years to come”

Jeremy Corbyn

Much attention today will focus on the last major televised event of the campaign when BBC1 stages a live debate from Wembley Arena in front of an audience of 6,000.

Making the case for Remain will be Sadiq Khan, the Mayor of London, Ruth Davidson, the Tory leader in Scotland, and Frances O’Grady, the TUC’s general secretary.

They will be opposed by Boris Johnson, the former London Mayor, Andrea Leadsom, the Energy minister, and the Labour MP Gisela Stuart.

Senior Labour figures including the party’s leader, Jeremy Corbyn, and three former leaders, Ed Miliband, Gordon Brown and Neil Kinnock, will appear at pro-Remain events across the UK.

Mr Corbyn claimed that quitting the EU would risk economic recovery and threaten a “bonfire of employment rights”. He said: “These next few hours will shape Britain’s future for years to come.”

Meanwhile, the leaders of the pro-Brexit will step up their drive for support with a flurry of campaign visits today.

They argue that their “air war” is being backed by a more vigorous and enthusiastic “ground war” than their opponents are mounting.

The Economists for Brexit group will today claim that unskilled EU migrants are costing the country £6.6bn a year, equating to £17.75 per month for each taxpayer.

But Remain campaigners attacked the group for making “baseless claims”.

