What Brexit means if you’re an EU citizen in Britain

2016-06-24

Britain is home to three million European Union citizens, over two million of which are taxpayers. Today, few are mourning the country’s decision to leave the EU more than they. 

In his resignation speech, David Cameron sought to reassure them that “there will be no immediate changes in your circumstances”. Should they take heart?

A. Britain has not yet left the EU. That will only happen once the terms of Brexit have been negotiated, which will probably take years. Until then, as Cameron says, EU nationals will keep their automatic rights to live and work in the country.

A. Nobody really knows. If Britain follows the likes of Norway and ends up with an arrangement that maintains the free movement of people, little will change. Given the central role of immigration in securing the Leave vote, however, the government will be under intense pressure to avoid this.

A. Remainers have refused to confirm that Europeans will definitely be allowed to stay. Pressed on this subject, a Home Office spokesman replied, “there is a great deal of uncertainty about how it would work.” The Leave camp has dismissed such evasiveness as a fear tactic. “Clearly any EU citizen that is legally here… would have the right to remain,” said Eurosceptic Tory MP Peter Bone. “Any other suggestion is just absurd.”

A. True. While acknowledging the uncertainty, legal experts tend to side with the Leavers. They point to the Vienna Convention of 1969, under which the termination of a treaty “does not affect any right, obligation or legal situation of the parties created through the execution of the treaty prior to its termination.” In layman’s terms: any changes to EU migrants’ rights that may result from the negotiations will not affect those already living in Britain.

A. Even here, though, there are doubts. Other experts argue that the convention refers only to state rights, and does not guarantee those of individuals. Ominously, it isn’t mentioned in Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty, which sets down the procedure for withdrawal from the EU.

A. Deportations are highly unlikely. They would harm the economy, and could trigger reprisals on Brits living in Europe. That said, Europeans who want to stay in Britain may face a good deal of paperwork. Either way, they are spooked: according to reports, there has been a surge of applications for British citizenship over the past months.

