Ellie Butler’s grandfather calls for full inquiry into her death

2016-06-22

The grandfather of murdered six-year-old Ellie Butler has called for a full public inquiry to be held into the circumstances of her death, as he disowned his daughter for her role in the killing.

Neal Gray, who tried to prevent his granddaughter being returned to the care of her abusive parents but was overruled by a High Court judge, said questions remained about the role of social workers who failed to spot that Ellie was in danger.

“You don’t think one of your own offspring could possibly be involved in a terrible, tragic crime”

Neal Gray, speaking about his daughter

Mr Gray spoke out after Ellie’s father Ben Butler, 36, was jailed for a minimum of 23 years for murdering her in a fit of rage in October 2013. Mr Gray’s daughter Jennie, Butler’s partner, was jailed for 42 months for child cruelty and perverting the course of justice.

“Now the court case is over I hope to pursue a judicial review or an article 2 inquiry,” Mr Gray said. “In layman’s terms, a public inquiry surrounding this case to find out why the judiciary didn’t do their job correctly, why the social services failed Ellie – especially the private side.

“I want it all open and above board, and I want everybody to answer because everybody failed Ellie completely and utterly.”

During a series of interviews on the BBC, Mr Gray said he had disowned his “aggressive and threatening” daughter, claiming she had told Ellie: “’If you don’t come back and live with mummy and daddy, we won’t love you any more’.”

He added: “You don’t think one of your own offspring could possibly be involved in a terrible, tragic crime. Unfortunately she was.

“I understand he was violent and controlling, but I think she’s also capable of being the same with him.”

Mr Gray and his wife Linda, who died on the first day of the murder trial, were Ellie’s maternal grandparents and cared for the child after her father was accused of shaking her as a baby.

They were forced to hand her back 11 months before her death on the orders of High Court judge Mrs Justice Hogg.

“We tried to fight it tooth and nail but every time we protested we were told we were troublemakers and we were elderly people and we weren’t worthy of looking after children,” Mr Gray said.

“At the time, he told the court: “I hope you all have a conscience because one day you might have blood on your hands.”

Mr Gray said he last saw Ellie during a 30-minute visit at a McDonald’s in Sutton, south London, the day before she died.

“She wasn’t the Ellie we knew. She had bruises on her forehead and her face and scratches, her hair was all bedraggled, she had odd shoes, odd socks, clothes and she looked as though she’d been dragged through the back of a hedgerow,” he recalled.

Neal Gray, in his own words

On Ellie’s personality

“She was fantastic, very bubbly, a beautiful little girl, always on the go all the time, lots of energy like little children have, very brainy, nobody’s fool. It was the best years of our life.”

On failing to win custody of Ellie

“We tried to fight it tooth and nail but every time we protested we were told we were troublemakers and we were elderly people and we weren’t worthy of looking after children. I said ‘I hope you all have a conscience because one day you might have blood on your hands’.”

On seeing Ellie the day before she died

“We had half an hour to see her and she wasn’t the Ellie we knew. She had bruises on her forehead and scratches, her hair was all bedraggled. She had odd shoes, socks and clothes and looked as though she had been dragged through the back of a hedgerow. You could see her eyes were sunken and there was sadness in her eyes.”

On his daughter Jennie Gray

“You don’t think one of your own offspring could possibly be involved in a terrible, tragic crime. Unfortunately she was. I understand he [Ben Butler] was violent and controlling but I think she’s also capable of being the same with him.”

On changing the law

“I believe the social services laws have got to be brought into the 21st century and the family courts system has to be changed radically. Somebody has got to stand up and make sure no other child gets hurt like my granddaughter got hurt. I will make it my goal for the rest of my life to fight for any child to be saved.”

