How to move to Gibraltar

2016-06-24

When Sunderland returned an emphatic vote for Leave at 11.24pm – the first of the night – Remainers shuddered. Within moments, Google recorded a 680% spike in searches for “move to Gibraltar”.

With its favourable tax regime and warm climate, Gibraltar has long attracted expats. Dangling from the southern tip of the Iberian peninsula, the tiny overseas territory is a slice of Britain away from home. English is spoken, most of the 32,000 residents hold the UK passport, and there’s a Marks & Spencer. Soon enough, it could become the last refuge for Brits in search of some visa-free sun.

Which may explain the surge of interest. Tempted? Before you pack your bags, though, allow us to make a few suggestions…

Keep an eye on geopolitics. Despite voting to Remain with a stonking 96% majority, Gibraltar is set to leave the EU along with the rest of the country. Spain, which has had designs on the territory ever since losing it in 1713, has already pounced. Its acting foreign minister announced on Friday that Brexit is a game-changer, and as such his government will seek co-sovereignty over Gibraltar.

Have a game plan. Even without an influx of embittered Remainers, space is already at a premium. The 2.6-square-mile territory is the fifth most densely populated territory in the world. Tax breaks may have greased up the economy – and the online gaming industry in particular – but the job market is fiercely competitive. Most jobs are given to locals. Don’t go there looking for one.

Be ready to commute. Around half the workforce live in Spain, on the other side of a border that can be a pain to cross. Of course, even if the Spanish don’t attempt to reclaim Gibraltar, they could tighten controls further after Brexit – or shut the border altogether.

Learn Spanish. For all the pink skin and red phone boxes, Gibraltar is by no means an exclusively British society. It has a small number of Spanish residents, and a far larger population of migrant workers, who would rather speak their own language than English.

Beware the monkeys. The territory is also home to some 230 Barbary macaques who aren’t exactly known for their hospitality. They steal, scratch and blithely hospitalise dozens of people a year. A local legend says that the Brits won’t leave Gibraltar until the monkeys do. All eyes are on the beasts now.

