Neo-nazi group voices support for Jo Cox murder suspect Thomas Mair

2016-06-19

A far-right British group has voiced support for the murder of Jo Cox in an attempt to hijack the Vote Leave campaign.

The North-east branch of National Action posted a number of pictures of murder suspect Thomas Mair on 16 June following the shooting of the MP outside a library in Birstall, West Yorkshire.

The first image, captioned: “#voteleave, don’t let this man’s sacrifice go in vain. #JoCox would have filled Yorkshire with more sub-humans” appeared within hours of the MP’s death.

#VoteLeave, don't let this man's sacrifice go in vain.#JoCox would have filled Yorkshire with more subhumans! pic.twitter.com/qXT5ez6dlG

— National Action NE (@NANorthEast_) June 16, 2016



This was followed on 17 June with an image captioned “Our thoughts go out to Thomas Mair #BritainFirst #JoCoxMP #WhiteJihad #ChurchillAkbar.”

Our thoughts go out to Thomas Mair #BritainFirst #JoCoxMP #WhiteJihad #ChurchillAkbar ☝ pic.twitter.com/wngm38GbKx

— National Action NE (@NANorthEast_) June 17, 2016



The posts follow tweets from Marine Le Pen, leader of France’s far-right group The National Front, which attempted to explain away the killing of the MP for Batley and Spen.

Le Pen said: “People resort to violence because they are sneered by the Brussels elite.”

"Méprisées par leurs élites inféodées à Bruxelles, les classes populaires ont parfois recours elles aussi à une forme de violence." #MENL

— Marine Le Pen (@MLP_officiel) June 17, 2016



According to information on the group’s website, National Action states it is not an extremist group but  “radical” and “only advocate[s] legal violence”.

“Our ultimate aim of a white Britain can only ever be achieved through state power and the complicity of state institutions,” it states.

A number of right-wing extremist supporters have tried to attach themselves to the Brexit campaign in recent months, including Andrew Edge, a prominent EDL member who posed with a Ukip banner beside the gravestones of Ronnie and Reggie Kray.

Speaking on Peston on Sunday, Ukip leader Nigel Farage admitted that the killing of Jo Cox had harmed the Brexit campaign.

He said: “I think we had momentum before this terrible tragedy”. He  went on to describe Thomas Mair as an individual with “serious mental health issues”.

HOPE not Hate, a charity responsible for monitoring extreme right wing behaviour in the UK, said National Action has 100 members.

A spokesperson said: “The danger lies not so much in the group itself, but in those that would believe its message – and take it to its violent and logical extreme.”

The charity is one of three organisations that will receive charitable donations from a GoFundMe page set up to honour causes that Jo Cox MP supported.

Mainstream political parties have agreed not to contest the by-election, however Liberty GB, a self-described “Anti-Islamisation party”, have announced that their press officer Jack Buckby intends to run as the new MP.

