Sterling crashes by 3 per cent after Sunderland’s Leave vote

2016-06-24

The value of Sterling dropped sharply by around 3 per cent on the markets in an instant reaction to the Sunderland result, as traders took on board the possibility of a strong result for Leave.

The pound quickly fell from 1.50 to 1.43 against the US dollar as earlier confidence in the markets took a hit.

Meanwhile, the odds of a “remain” victory fell from almost 90 percent to 72 percent on the Betfair exchange.

University of Strathclyde political scientist John Curtice told the BBC “it may be possible that the experts are going to have egg on their face later on tonight. It may be the first sign that the ‘remain’ side are not going to do as well as those early polls suggested.”

Financial markets have been volatile ahead of the vote, with currency traders predicting a plunging pound if Britain votes to leave.

Opinion polls suggested a tight race. But the pound surged yesterday as market speculation grew that voters would choose to stay in the EU.

It rose to its highest level this year at $1.4830 before falling off slightly.

Meanwhile, Britain’s benchmark FTSE 100 index closed 1.2 per cent higher, adding to big gains earlier in the week, with global stock markets also rising.

Bookies clearly saw momentum for the Remain camp. Betting market Betfair said the probability that the country would stay stood at 84 per cent. William Hill revised the chances of a Leave vote from 25 per cent to just under 17 per cent.

Market strategist Michael Ingram of BGC Partners said a Leave vote would shock the markets and cause a “very, very difficult day indeed” for the pound. But he said he thought the financial system would cope.

“I think it would actually be containable, and I certainly would not be throwing myself out of a window,” he said.

Turnout was considered critical to the outcome, as polling suggested a large number of undecided voters. A big turnout was expected to favour the Remain campaign, as those who waver at the end tend to go for the status quo.

Originally published on our sister site, The Scotsman

