Gove and Cameron: the end of a beautiful friendship

2016-06-22

Once they were the closest of political and personal friends, but the relationship between David Cameron and Michael Gove has hit a new low.

The Prime Minister claimed Mr Gove had “rather lost it” after the pro-Brexit Justice Secretary compared economic experts warning about the fall-out of Brexit to the Nazis smearing Albert Einstein in the 1930s.

Mr Gove, who later apologised for his “clumsy” comparison, has already hinted he might step down from the Government if Remain is victorious today.

“I’m sorry for speaking so clumsily and apologise for giving offence.”

Michael Gove

The Justice Secretary provoked controversy when he likened pro-EU economists to Nazi propagandists and suggested they were “in the pay of the government”.

He said: “We have to be careful about historical comparisons, but Albert Einstein during the 1930s was denounced by the German authorities for being wrong and his theories were denounced, and one of the reasons of course he was denounced was because he was Jewish.”

Mr Cameron said his Cabinet colleague had made a “massive mistake” considering the quality of their credentials.

He told Sky News: “To hear the Leave campaign today sort of comparing independent experts and economists to Nazi sympathisers. I think they have rather lost it.

“These people are independent – economists who have won Nobel prizes, business leaders responsible for creating thousands of jobs, institutions that were set up after the war to try to provide independent advice.”

A repentant Mr Gove said: “Obviously I did not mean to imply anything about the motives of those who have spoken out in favour of staying in the EU.

“Throughout the campaign I’ve avoided making personal attacks, I’m sorry for speaking so clumsily and apologise for giving offence.”

Earlier this week Mr Gove cast doubt on his Cabinet future by disclosing he would “reflect” on his position after the referendum result is declared tomorrow.

If he quits the Tory frontbench, it would mark the end of a close relationship with Mr Cameron.

Mr Gove was an early supporter of his bid for the Conservative leadership and has held three Cabinet posts.

The Goves and Camerons have also holidayed together, have shared the school run and have babysat for each other.

Asked yesterday if it would be difficult for the pair to work together, Mr Cameron insisted: “Well, no, as I say I don’t think it will be because all Conservatives agree it was right to have a referendum and it’s right to carry out the instructions of people.

“This is not about some sort of Tory psychodrama and who likes who and who, and all the rest of it. This is about the future of our country.”

