How would Britain actually leave the EU after the vote?

2016-06-21

If Britain votes to Leave, the formal process of withdrawal from the European Union could begin within weeks.

The mechanism for tearing up membership is set out in Article 50 of the 2009 Lisbon Treaty.

It has never been tested as the EU has always been expanding rather than contracting.

The UK could be an ex-member by the summer or autumn of 2018.

Once the Article has been invoked by a national leader, a country heading for the exit door cannot change its mind without unanimous approval of the other 27 member states.

Constitutional experts argue that once this has happened there is no provision for a second referendum.

The Article also stipulates that negotiations over the terms of a nation’s departure have to be completed within two years.

The speed with which Article 50 is triggered – and therefore the potential date at which Britain pulls out of the EU – has been the source of contention between the rival camps.

George Osborne has suggested that could happen within a fortnight of an Out vote, while pro-Brexiteer Chris Grayling has argued it does not need to happen immediately.

“Detailed talks on the exit would get underway, with Britain on one side and the 27 remaining members on the other.”

One obvious moment for David Cameron to take that historic step would be a meeting of EU leaders next week in Brussels, although he could delay until the autumn to allow a breathing space after the intensity of the referendum battle.

After Article 50 has been invoked, detailed talks on the exit would get underway, with Britain on one side and the 27 remaining members on the other.

For the EU to approve an agreement, a “super-majority” of states (20, as long as they represent at least 65 per cent of their population) has to agree.

In practice a deal would be hugely difficult without the endorsement of Germany, France and Italy.

If the two sides fail to agree within two years, Britain’s membership would automatically lapse unless the other 27 voted unanimously to extend negotiations.

On this timetable, the UK could be an ex-member by the summer or autumn of 2018.

However, the Leavers argue that Article 50 should only be invoked following informal talks with Brussels, potentially to hammer out a “friendly” trade deal in the interests of both Britain and the EU.

Mr Grayling has suggested that departure need not take place until 2019.

Meanwhile, the Government would have to repeal the European Communities Act, which gives primacy to EU law, and decide which EU agreements would be scrapped, amended or retained. They are estimated to amount to 80,000 pages of legislation.

