EU Referendum: How the campaign unfolded

2016-06-23

Whether you think it has been predictable, nasty, depressing, boring, transfixing or enlightening, everyone has a view on how the EU referendum campaign has been waged. Here are some of the key moments:

21 February: Boris enters the fray

A day after David Cameron announced the date of the EU referendum, the then Mayor of London said he was in favour of a Leave vote.

In a major boost for the Brexit team, Boris Johnson said after a “huge amount of heartache” he had made the “agonisingly difficult” decision to argue against the Prime Minister.

Mr Cameron was said to be furious when he heard the news – perhaps because he realised what an asset Boris would prove to the Brexit cause over the coming months.

At the time, some suggested that Mr Johnson was merely interested in succeeding his rival as Prime Minister and saw winning the referendum as the easiest way of doing so.

18 April: George Osborne’s stark warning

In one of numerous interventions about the economic dangers of a Brexit, the Chancellor presented a 200-page Treasury document which concluded that leaving the EU would cost the public finances an estimated £36bn a year, equivalent to £4,300 per household.

In a BBC interview that morning, he said this would leave Britain “permanently poorer”.

Key figures on the Leave side were quick to pour scorn on the gloomy forecast, with former Conservative Chancellor Lord Lamont describing the document as “spurious and entirely unbelievable” and John Redwood condemning its long-term findings as “completely worthless”.

22 April: Barack Obama’s intervention

The US President used an official visit to urge Britain to say in the EU, warning that the UK would be at the “back of the queue” for American trade deals if it left.

During a joint press conference alongside David Cameron, Mr Obama argued that the UK was “at its best” when helping to lead a strong European Union.

The US president’s intervention did not go down well with Leave campaigners, with Nigel Farage suggesting he was merely doing Mr Cameron’s “bidding” and others suggesting his views on the debate were irrelevant.

Opinion polls following his visit also suggested that his words did not sit well with voters, putting the Leave side three points up.

12 May: Bank of England Governor weighs in

Mark Carney caused a stir when he warned during a press conference that leaving the EU was likely to have a damaging effect on the economy and “could possibly include a technical recession”.

His comments were welcomed by Remain campaigners, but caused controversy as some said he had compromised the Bank’s independence on political matters.

His main critic was Jacob Rees-Mogg, the Conservative MP and Brexit campaigner, who said he “should be fired” as Governor for the comments, while others warned him to be “careful” about straying into politics. Mr Carney later defended his position, saying the Bank had a “duty” to say what it thought.

2 June: Cameron fails to impress on TV

With the referendum only weeks away, the Prime Minister had the chance to make his case for a Remain vote as he was questioned on Sky News in front of a live studio audience.

However, he appeared to struggle under pressure, being accused of “waffling” and “scaremongering” over the potential impact of a Brexit.

In a particularly damaging moment, Mr Cameron was laughed at when host Faisal Islam asked him: “What comes first? World War Three, or the global Brexit recession?”

By contrast, Michael Gove’s appearance on the same programme the following day did not meet with the same amount of ridicule.

16 June: Jo Cox’s death

The EU referendum campaign was suspended for two days following the death of the Labour MP, who was attacked in her constituency in Birstall, West Yorkshire.

On the same day, Mr Farage was criticised for a controversial poster showing a column of migrants walking through the European countryside under the slogan “Breaking Point”, which some suggested was reminiscent of extremist literature produced in the 1930s.

A few days Ms Cox’s death, Mr Farage suggested that the Leave side – which appeared to have captured the lead in the polls – had “lost momentum” due to the break in campaigning.

