Jo Cox in quotes: What she campaigned for

2016-06-17

Labour MP Jo Cox is being remembered for her passion, commitment and service to the community after she was killed in an attack on Thursday.

The Batley and Spen MP was shot and stabbed near Birstall Library, where she had been holding a constituency surgery. A 52-year-old man, named locally as Tommy Mair, has been arrested.

Conservative MP Andrew Mitchell, who set up the All Party Parliamentary Working Group on Syria with Mrs Cox, described her in the Daily Telegraph as a “force of nature…committed to helping other people.”

Prior to becoming an MP, she had worked for Oxfam from 2001 to 2009 in a variety of different roles – on trade reform and advocacy. As part of her role as an MP she campaigned on a number of issues.

“Our communities have been deeply enhanced by immigration, be it of Irish Catholics across the constituency or of Muslims from Gujarat in India or from Pakistan, principally from Kashmir. While we celebrate our diversity, what surprises me time and time again as I travel around the constituency is that we are far more united and have far more in common with each other than things that divide us.”

“Yorkshire folk are not fools: talk about devolving power to cities and regions, while simultaneously stripping them of the resources to deliver and subjecting northern councils such as Kirklees to the harshest of cuts, is not compatible with a worthy commitment to building a northern powerhouse to drive growth and prosperity.”

“I am Batley and Spen born and bred, and I could not be prouder of that. I am proud that I was made in Yorkshire and I am proud of the things we make in Yorkshire. Britain should be proud of that, too. I look forward to representing the great people of Batley and Spen here over the next five years.”

“Don’t get me wrong, I’m no war-monger. I opposed the Iraq war and worked for a decade as an Oxfam aid worker – but this isn’t Iraq. This is a humanitarian crisis. I don’t believe there will be a military solution to this conflict but I do believe there will be a military component to it. The vast majority of the fighting will be done by people from the region and by Syrians themselves, but that doesn’t mean that the UK shouldn’t play a role.” Jo Cox, writing in the Yorkshire Post, September 2015.

“While I am a huge fan of President Obama—indeed, I worked for him in North Carolina in 2008—I believe that both he and the Prime Minister made the biggest misjudgment of their time in office when they put Syria on the “too difficult” pile and, instead of engaging fully, withdrew and put their faith in a policy of containment. This judgment, made by both leaders for different reasons, will, I believe, be judged harshly by history, and it has been nothing short of a foreign policy disaster…I do not believe that either President Obama or the Prime Minister tried to do harm in Syria but, as is said, sometimes all it takes for evil to triumph is for good men to do nothing.” 3 May 2016, House of Commons.

“Who can blame desperate parents for wanting to escape the horror that their families are experiencing? These children have been exposed to things no child should ever witness, and I know I would risk life and limb to get my two precious babies out of that hellhole.

“I am deeply proud of the Government for leading the way internationally on providing humanitarian support to Syrian civilians. Their commitment in terms of finances and policy to help people in the region, and across the middle east and north Africa, will save lives. However, in the chaos caused by the Syrian conflict and many other conflicts, many thousands of already deeply scarred children have become separated from their parents and carers, and they are already in Europe. The Government’s generosity to date has not extended to those vulnerable children.

“I recognise that this is not easy, but tonight we are being asked to make a decision that transcends party politics. Any Member who has seen the desperation and fear on the faces of children trapped in inhospitable camps across Europe must surely feel compelled to act.

“In the shanty towns of Calais and Dunkirk, the aid workers I spent a decade with on the frontline as an aid worker myself, tell me that the children there face some of the most horrific circumstances in the world. Surely we have to do the right thing tonight and support the Dubs amendment.”  In a speech to the Commons, April 2016

“In Yorkshire and the Humber, children are now being left behind, and no child should be left behind. We can no longer accept that young people in London are far more likely to achieve good outcomes at school than those in other regions.

“We have a duty to ensure that every child has access to the best possible education. It should not matter where they were born. No child should be left behind.” In a House of Commons debate on 18 April 2016

“I never really grew up being political or Labour. It kind of came at Cambridge where it was just a realisation that where you were born mattered. That how you spoke mattered… who you knew mattered. I didn’t really speak right or knew the right people. I spent the summers packing toothpaste at a factory working where my dad worked and everyone else had gone on a gap year! To be honest my experience at Cambridge really knocked me for about five years.” Interview with Yorkshire Post

“With people queuing to access food banks in my constituency, does the Prime Minister think it is a priority for the country to bring back foxhunting?” 8 July 2015

“Immigration is a legitimate concern, but it’s not a good reason to leave the EU. I very rarely agree with the Prime Minister but on this he’s right: we are stronger, safer and better off in.” Writing in the Yorkshire Post – 10 June 2016

