Suspect in Jo Cox killing described as a ‘loner’ who enjoyed gardening

2016-06-16

The man named as the suspect in the killing of Jo Cox has been described as a “loner” as police began to investigate whether he had links with far-right extremists.

Neighbours of Tommy Mair, 52, said he had performed occasional work as a gardener in the area of Birstall where he had lived for at least 30 years with his grandmother until her death in recent years.

Forensic officers were last night continuing a fingertip search of his home and its garden as detectives began to piece together a picture of Mr Mair’s past amid evidence that he had previously shown an interest in extreme right wing politics.

Witnesses to the attack on the MP said her killer had shouted “Britain first” as he made the attack.

Residents spoke of their shock at reports of the arrest of Mr Mair, who had once featured in a local newspaper speaking of his support for a project run by a mental health day centre he had attended.

David Pickles, a neighbour, said: “I still can’t believe it. He’s the last guy I would have thought of. He’s just quiet. He did a lot of people’s gardens round here. But he did it quietly.

“He lived with his grandmother. He was a bit of a loner. I can’t say a wrong word about him. He was so quiet.”

The i has established that Mr Mair once subscribed to a magazine called South African Patriot, associated with far-right organisations around the world. A spokesman for the magazine said last night that the subscription had been during the 1980s and it had never had any direct contact with him.

In 2000, Mr Mair spoke of his satisfaction at taking part in a gardening project for a local mental health charity.

He said: “I can genuinely say it has done me more good than all the psychotherapy and medication in the world. Many people who are mentally ill are socially isolated and disconnected from society. Feelings of worthlessness are also common, mainly caused by long term unemployment.”

Mr Mair’s half-brother Duane St Louis told ITV News that his sibling had “never been in trouble in his life”, adding: “He’s not like that, he wouldn’t hurt a fly”.

He added that he’d spoken to Mr Mair’s mother and she is “shocked and can’t understand what has happened”.

He wasn’t aware of Mr Mair having anything to do with guns or knives, he said and asked if his brother was racist he said “no chance”.

