How did Tim Peake get so much stuff into space?

2016-06-17

We used to thinking of astronauts as the most isolated people imaginable, floating miles above the earth with only a tin box full of air to breath and a toothpaste tube full of “roast chicken” to eat.

But then Tim Peake came along and started appearing at the Brit awards. He expressed his support for the English rugby team as they took on Scotland during the Six Nations, holding a rugby ball as he did it. He even ran a marathon.

The question is, how did Tim Peake get so much stuff into space? And how does he have time to do anything, what with presenting awards and tweeting photos and dodging rugby balls?

As Tim Peake prepares to come down to Earth, two experts from the UK Space Agency explain the logistics.



Tim as a crew member is allowed a parcel from home every once in a while that Rebecca, his wife, would pack up. That has to be checked by the space agencies and Nasa to make sure there’s nothing unsafe in there, but other than that, Rebecca can send what she likes, so that’s how he gets birthday presents and Christmas presents and things to keep morale up while he’s in space for six months. Something like the tuxedo t-shirt I believe came through that route.

There tends to be one on every cargo vehicle, which typically arrive every two to three months. Over the last year we had a lot of problems with cargo ships, so it was very quiet for the first few months of Tim’s mission and then very busy all of a sudden. The care packages are very small – we’re talking half a kilo, less than a shoebox-worth.

Other things go up with an official PR kit. The UK Space Agency worked with the European Space Agency and we were able to send some items up for specified official use for planned PR activities that took place. All of those have to be checked for safety and go through flammability testing. Anything you send in space has to be checked so it’s not going to cause any trouble up there to crew or the atmosphere or the station. We sent up things like flags – we made sure there was a UK flag and a flag for each of our countries in the UK. At Hogmanay he had the Scottish flag out. We put some other bits and pieces in there – we sent up a copy of the Principia Mathematica, that Tim’s mission is named after.

Other things, such as the rugby ball, are up there on the station anyway. There are all sorts of random objects that make their way up through crew personal packages and PR stuff. I think the rugby ball made its way up through [Italian astronaut] Luca Parmitano’s mission, but I’m not certain on that. We didn’t launch a rugby ball specifically for that [Six Nations] message.

The PR and communications area of work was a long time in the planning, so something like the Horizon documentary that went out a few days before Tim went into space, that was being discussed and made as soon as Tim’s flight was announced in 2013. But many of the things, including the Brits, were requests that came in while Tim is in space. One of the things to note is that all of the PR things you see, like the Brits, like the rugby, are done in Tim’s spare time. He has a full working week, Monday to Friday, 8-6, doing science. And the way crew time is allocated, there’s nothing built in for PR. The station is a science laboratory. But the crew use some of their Saturday recording these messages for various events.

The Space Station passed through magnificent aurora Australis last night https://t.co/7lZvTKVyOu pic.twitter.com/unstbZRwPi

— Tim Peake (@astro_timpeake) June 13, 2016



It’s been a different era of exploration. Social media arrived and everybody is sharing photographs and videos of what they’re doing. It’s proved a very useful and powerful tool for celebrities and individuals and companies to share their messages. Also, in tandem, technology has improved to allow astronauts on the space station to allow astronauts to use these things. They now have internet up there. It’s very slow, it’s about the speed of dial-up, but they are able to stay connected.

Not testing a new rollercoaster ride – research into muscle atrophy & how it may help patients rehabilitate on Earth pic.twitter.com/mZqUmyzFnP

— Tim Peake (@astro_timpeake) April 19, 2016



When you look at the history of what has been seen through the ages, in the early days of Apollo and Gemini, when we were pushing the boundaries of going into space for the first time, that was very exciting from the perspective that we’d never done it before. But you got the photos back as grainy photos at the end of the mission or the odd one downlinked. Somewhere in the Eighties and Nineties, space flight dropped out of public consciousness at the same level.

But as social media has come in and the crew are able to share the view out their window, that’s allowed everybody to connect with it more and learn more about what they’re doing up in space. That’s hugely important because people understand why the space station’s there and the great science it’s doing. It gets kids excited, it gets parents excited.



A rocket lifts off the Earth because it has enough thrust to overcome the force of gravity keeping it on the ground. This force of gravity is the rocket’s weight, and depends on the rocket’s mass. The more stuff you want to launch, the more massive the rocket is, and the more fuel you need in order to provide the thrust to lift it off the ground. The problem is, the rocket fuel also adds mass, which requires more fuel, and you get into a bit of a loop. In order to save fuel, rockets often launch in stages where smaller rockets burn one after another and are discarded along the way so that the mass is reduced.

As the rocket fuel is burned up during launch and exhausted out the nozzle, the total weight of the rocket constantly changes. This is a big change in weight for large rockets and has to be included in equations that work out how fast and high the rocket goes. It’s a classic first year physics problem to work out how rocket speed changes over time during a launch.

A Space Shuttle mission is estimated to have cost about $10,000 (£7,021) per pound. Today, private launch company SpaceX has the cheapest rockets around with Falcon 9 and Falcon Heavy. SpaceX is one of the few companies that freely advertises its launch costs and estimates a launch cost of $744 (£522) per pound for its new Falcon Heavy rocket. The hope is that private companies like SpaceX, Boeing, Orbital ATK, and Blue Origin will continue to drive launch costs down as they pioneer new technologies and reusable launch systems.

This book flew to Mir with Helen Sharman in 1991 & is signed by Gagarin, Helen’s crew & now #ISS crew #CosmonautsDay pic.twitter.com/ZGBimP2PBz

— Tim Peake (@astro_timpeake) April 12, 2016



In his personal baggage allowance, he took things like photographs of his family, a book given to him by [previous British astronaut] Helen Sharman (Yuri Gagarin’s ‘Road to the Stars’), and the tuxedo shirt that he presented the Brit Awards in. He also brought 14 GB of music to listen to during his six month mission, and got to select certain ‘bonus’ food items to add to the standard selection of food on the ISS.

