The UK will now become a tax haven for the rich

2016-06-24

Last month a hedge fund threatened to move from Connecticut to New York. Its boss, Ray Dalio, earned $1.4bn last year. That’s as much as 34,482 teachers earning the average salary for UK teachers of £29,000. But that wasn’t enough for him so he demanded Connecticut help him build new offices. They gave him $22m.

He doesn’t need $22m. It’s less than a fiftieth of what he earned last year. But Connecticut does. Without it, Connecticut’s ability to employ policewomen and firemen, to repair its roads and look after its elderly, to run its schools and operate its hospitals is diminished.

None of that could happen in the EU. The EU has rules – so-called “state aid” rules – to stop powerful corporations playing countries off, one against the other. Corporations don’t demand sweeteners because they know countries can’t give them.

You might argue this involves the EU overstepping its mandate. But corporate tax avoidance is a huge problem. By moving money from their right trouser pockets to their left corporations cost the countries of the EU, its parliament estimated, €160-€190bn last year alone. And the power of capital is such that states acting alone were powerless to resist. Ireland – a tiny and heavily indebted country – stands to recover up to $19bn in tax from Apple alone. But so fearful is it of the consequences of losing the ability to offer Apple sweeteners that it is fighting not to receive that enormous sum.

We were then the second biggest economy in Europe – outside of the EU we are the third – and we will have suffered a substantial share of that loss. Without the protection of state aid rules we may be unable to claim it back. And outside the EU we will be less able to resist the demands of corporations for tax sweeteners. Like Ray Dalio in Connecticut, corporations will now be free to say to us: if you want us to stay, you’ll need to give us a tax bung. And, emboldened by them, many wealthy individuals will, too.

This is exactly what many of the architects and funders of Brexit have said they want. People like Peter Hargreaves, who gave the official Leave campaign over £3m, have said explicitly they believe that if we lower tax rates the wealthy and big corporations will come here in droves and that will be good for all of us. Less trickle than waterfall. But will it work? We’re about to find out.

Jolyon Maugham is a tax barrister

