Why are Tory MPs all tweeting the exact same message?

2016-06-23

As the polls closed and it became clear that, no matter who wins, the country is divided, something strange started to happen.

Tory MPs started to tweet almost exactly the same thing:

We delivered on our promise of a referendum – now let’s get on it with.

It remains to be seen whether their message of unity will be heard by those in their party who have spent months attacking each other in public, never mind by the public at large.

But they are certainly united in their sentiment:

The Conservative Party has delivered on the referendum. Whatever the result, now is the time for us all to come together.

— Gavin Williamson (@GWilliamsonMP) June 23, 2016



The PM delivered Conservative pledge for the EU referendum, whatever the outcome, we now unite to focus on delivering rest of our manifesto

— Philip Dunne (@Dunne4Ludlow) June 23, 2016



To #Gloucester count. Whatever the result we've delivered on the Referendum. Now to get on with the rest of the mandate – together.

— Richard Graham (@RichardGrahamMP) June 23, 2016



Proud a Conservative Govt delivered EU referendum so public decide. We will implement the people's decision, along with rest of manifesto

— Chris Philp (@chrisphilp_mp) June 23, 2016



Well, we delivered the referendum & whatever the result, it's time to come together, reunite &deliver our election winning manifesto #EURef

— Suella Fernandes MP (@SuellaFernandes) June 23, 2016



Now the polls have closed we have delivered on our promise of a referendum. Whatever the result it's our job to deliver our manifesto now

— Karen Lumley MP (@Tell_Karen) June 23, 2016



Polls have now closed. Whatever the outcome, we delivered the referendum we promised. Now its time to come together & deliver for Britain

— Guy Opperman MP (@GuyOpperman) June 23, 2016



So that's it. Conservatives have delivered their promise of a referendum. Now whatever the result we need to get back together

— Paul Scully MP (@scullyp) June 23, 2016



The Conservative Party delivered a referendum as promised. Now we need to come together and respect the decision of the British people

— Gavin Barwell MP (@GavinBarwellMP) June 23, 2016



The @Conservatives delivered this referendum – a manifesto pledge as promised. Now time to come back together as a party whatever the result

— Chloe Smith (@NorwichChloe) June 23, 2016



Referendum is a manifesto promise delivered. Now is the time for @Conservatives to come together.

— Seema Kennedy MP (@SeemaKennedy) June 23, 2016



I am proud to have delivered a referendum to my constituents – now the Conservative party must come together again

— Stephen Hammond MP (@S_Hammond) June 23, 2016



The PM delivered on his promise of a referendum. After the result we pull together to keep the economy on track and deliver for Britain.

— Mike Freer MP (@mikefreermp) June 23, 2016



As the polls close, worth reflecting on fact that we delivered pledge to have referendum. Now the Conservative party can come back together

— Ed Vaizey (@edvaizey) June 23, 2016



The Conservatives have delivered on our pledge to hold a referendum, now we need to unite around other crucial policies, whatever the result

— margot james (@margot_james_mp) June 23, 2016



 

