Remain camp failed to argue how they could control immigration

2016-06-24

Concerns over immigration and a failure of being listened to sent large swathes of working class areas in Labour heartlands supporting Brexit.

Early results from the north east sent shockwaves through the country. Newcastle, with its large student population, had been expected to secure around 55 per cent for Remain but only had a tiny majority of 1,800 people (50.7 per cent) in favour.

A few moments later Sunderland announced 61 per cent had supported Leave and the tone was set.

“I have said many times that there is a feeling that people’s concerns about immigration haven’t been heard. That has got to be faced up to now.”

Andy Burnham, shadow Home Secretary

With net migration – the difference between the numbers of people arriving and leaving – running at record levels of around a third of a million a year, intense scrutiny has fallen on EU freedom of movement rules.

In May figures showed net migration had risen to the second highest level on record, with arrivals from the EU adding 184,000 annually to Britain’s population – the joint highest figure on record.

The Remain camp argued that if Britain withdrew from the EU but stayed in the single market, it would still have to accept free movement of labour.

Home Secretary Theresa May argued that exiting the bloc is not a “silver bullet” that “suddenly solves all our immigration issues”. But Leave campaigners argued that being in the EU means that Britain has hardly any control over who enters the country and who can be removed.

The question of how the country approaches immigration from the EU in a post-Brexit system is likely to be one of the most fraught of the exit process and is shrouded in uncertainty.

Options discussed include adopting an “Australian-style” points-based approach or extending restrictions that currently govern non-EU immigration to those arriving from the bloc.

David Cameron promised to reduce net migration to the “tens of thousands”, a pledge that was repeatedly thrown back in his face each quarter when the latest immigration statistics were published.

Neither Conservative nor Labour politicians could drown out the arguments for controlling immigration, which got to the heart of many people’s concerns.

Asked if the Labour Party has some “hard lessons” to learn, shadow Home Secretary Andy Burnham said: “Hard lessons for us all. I have said many times that there is a feeling that people’s concerns about immigration haven’t been heard, I’ve said that many, many times. That has got to be faced up to now.”

