Former US senator Gabrielle Giffords pays tribute to Jo Cox

2016-06-16

Former US senator Gabrielle Giffords, herself shot by a gunman while meeting constituents, has spoken of her shock and dismay at the death of MP Jo Cox.

“Absolutely sickened to hear of the assassination of Jo Cox,” she wrote. “She was young, courageous, and hardworking. A rising star, mother, and wife.”

A slew of emotional tributes to the West Yorkshire MP, who was married with two young children, were made in the wake of her death and were led in Westminster by David Cameron and Jeremy Corbyn.

“We’ve lost a great star. She had a big heart and people are going to be very, very sad at what has happened,” said Mr Cameron.

Mr Corbyn, the Labour leader, said: “The whole of the Labour Party and Labour family – and indeed the whole country – will be in shock at the horrific murder of Jo Cox.”

All events in the EU membership campaign were suspended shortly after news broke of the brutal attack on the Labour MP. It will resume tomorrow at the earliest.

“The death of Jo Cox is terrible, most for her family and friends, but also for what the whole country has lost”

Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury

Flags across Whitehall were lowered to half mast, and the BBC cancelled last night’s edition of Question Time.

The killing, which will renew calls for politicians to be given added protection, came a day after MPs left Westminster for a special 12-day recess during the Brexit campaign.

Archbishop of Canterbury Justin Welby said: “The death of Jo Cox is terrible, most for her family and friends, but also for what the whole country has lost. We pray for those who mourn.”

And Chief Rabbi Ephraim Mirvis said: “We’re united in grief today at the terrible loss of Jo Cox.

Brutally murdered as she served constituents. May her memory be for a blessing.”

A Labour MP who survived a violent attack at his constituency surgery also paid tribute to Ms Cox.

Stephen Timms was stabbed twice in the stomach in 2010 by a 21-year-old Islamist radical, who said she was taking revenge for his vote in favour of war in Iraq.

Speaking after Ms Cox’s death was announced yesterday afternoon, Mr Timms said: “I am shocked and appalled by the terrible news this afternoon.

“Jo was a wonderful MP, and a wonderful person. I – and everybody else – had been very impressed since her election last year.



