Leave vote stronger than expected amid high turnout

2016-06-23

The historic referendum on Britain’s European Union membership was heading for a dramatic finish today amid early signs that Leave was performing more strongly than expected.

More than 30 million voters cast their verdict on EU membership – some of them wading through floodwater to get to their polling stations.

A survey issued released immediately after the polling stations closed put Remain ahead by 52 per cent to 48 per cent, reflecting previous polls suggesting support for continuing EU membership had established a narrow lead.

However, one of the first areas to declare, Sunderland, backed by Brexit by 61 per cent to 39 per cent.

Within minutes of its announcement the markets took fright and the value of the pound crashed by seven cents against the pound.

Swindon, Kettering, Hartlepool, Middlesbrough, Bury and Broxbourne in Hertfordshire also voted heavily in favour of quitting the bloc, while North Warwickshire and Nuneaton were reported to have strongly backed Leave.

The Essex constituency of Basildon backed Brexit by 69 per cent to 31 per cent. Swansea and Merthyr Tydfil supported Leave amid speculation that a majority of Welsh voters would vote against EU membership.

Remain prevailed only narrowly in Newcastle – a city which had been assumed to be a stronger centre of Remain support.

Turnout was expected to be around 70 per cent, higher than in last year’s general election, following an often acrimonious campaign that pitted senior Tory figures against one another.

However, Remain established an early lead in Scotland and was expected to poll very strongly in London, setting the scene for a final result in which different parts of the UK voted in hugely different ways.

The apparent tightness of the race could mean that levels of turnout – and which groups of voters were most motivated – could prove crucial to the outcome.

The final pre-referendum survey by Ipsos Mori put Remain ahead of Leave by 52 per cent to 48 per cent. But the poll also found that 12 per cent of people said they may could switch sides.

Interest in the referendum had prompted a surge in voter registration, resulting in an electorate of 46,499,537 people, the largest ever seen in the UK. Long queues formed outside some polling stations, which opened at 7am.

However, there were fears that some voters may have been deterred by torrential rainstorms which soaked the South East of the England, forcing some polling stations to close as the floodwaters rose.

Asked if he was feeling confident ahead of the result, the pro-Brexit champion Boris Johnson said: “I think the polls have been very close.

“From what I have heard and all the information is that turnout is good in areas where we need it to be.”

Labour former minister Kate Hoey, who has joined Tories Boris Johnson and Michael Gove on the Leave campaign trail in recent weeks, claimed her party has permanently lost voters as a result of Labour’s pro-EU stance.

She told Sky News: “We will find thousands and thousands of Labour supporters abandoning the Labour view.”

