Boris, Theresa or Crabb – who will be next Prime Minister?

2016-06-24

Tory leadership runners and riders – odds Ladbrokes

Boris Johnson – 4/6

A card-sharp opportunist underneath the bumbling gait, Boris is believed to be a socially-liberal Conservative if he has a political philosophy. London survived his two-term Mayoralty, enhancing his administrative credentials. Hot favourite as long as his name makes the party members ballot but has earned the undying enmity of party grandees for pushing a Brexit ticket he previously dismissed. Will the country wear successive Old Etonian Prime Ministers?

Michael Gove – 7/1

A dark horse, the cerebral Gove has repeatedly insisted he has no leadership ambitions. A former journalist like Boris, the Aberdonian sped up the academies programme begun by his hero, Tony Blair, as a divisive Education Secretary before surprising many with his liberal language about prisons as Justice Secretary. Could be the brains behind a Boris premiership.

Theresa May – 11/4

A reticent Remainer, Theresa May avoided alienating Brexiters by keeping a low profile during the campaign. A solid Home Secretary, May is planning to run on a homeland security ticket, the icy “safe pair of hands” in a head-to-head with Johnson. Conservative members may hold her to account for the Government’s missed immigration targets.

Andrea Leadsom – 14/1

A former banker, only elected to Parliament in 2010, Leadsom shot to public prominence during the campaign putting the economic case for Britain’s post-EU future. Energy minister is behind May in the pecking order but has a touch of Thatcher steel. A good showing could secure her the Chancellorship.

Outsiders

Priti Patel 20-1

Right-wing Employment minister from Ugandan Immigrant family, who once backed the Referendum Party, is a rising star with members. Remain Tory MPs could “lend” votes to Patel in a bid to stop Boris making the final run-off.

Stephen Crabb 25-1

Work and Pensions secretary won the welfare reform concessions denied to predecessor Iain Duncan Smith. Brought up in a Welsh council house by his single-parent mother, Crabb speaks to a working class Tory audience and boasts a contrasting backstory to Boris.

Nicky Morgan 33-1

The closest to an heir to Cameron among the pack politically, the Education Secretary would give MPs the chance to put a centrist Remainer on the ballot. Forced to U-turn on the Government’s forced Academies programme, Morgan is putting a marker down for a future run if the party swings back from a eurosceptic position.

George Osborne 33-1

Once seen as Dave’s natural heir, the Chancellor appears fated not to enjoy even the brief Downing Street sojourn of Gordon Brown. Tarred by the failed Referendum strategy, Osborne looks to be the victim of a generational shift.

May shift his powerful Commons network behind Sajid Javid (25-1), the fiscally conservative Business Secretary, considering a pitch to become the UK’s first Asian Prime Minister.

@adamsherwin10

