Jeremy Corbyn has failed to show leadership, says Chuka Umunna

2016-06-24

Chuka Umunna has strongly criticised Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn for his failure to engage the public during the EU referendum campaign.

In an article for i, the prominent Labour backbench MP argues that his party should be doing more to address the public’s concerns over immigration. “[This] requires leadership which was sadly lacking from the very top of our party during the EU referendum campaign,” he writes.

“Labour requires leadership which was lacking from the top of our party during the campaign.”

Chuka Umunna

In a swipe at Corbyn, he adds, “Our main striker often wasn’t on the pitch, and when he was, failed to kick the ball into the net.”

This morning Umunna told LBC Radio, “I have put in every ounce of energy I could possibly find into the campaign.” When asked if he could say the same of his colleagues, he replied “no”, but refused to name names.

Corbyn has drawn condemnation for his perceived lack of commitment to the Remain campaign, which was backed by 218 out of 229 Labour MPs. Colleagues and party members have described his performance as “lukewarm”; many believe that, privately, the lifelong Eurosceptic was none too concerned about keeping Britain in the EU.

Echoing Umunna’s words, Corbyn’s detractors complain that he made too few speeches in favour of the EU, and that when he did, he was too critical of the institution. On a chat show two weeks ago, he rated his enthusiasm for the EU as “seven, seven and a half [out of ten]”. Throughout the campaign, unlike other Labour politicians, he refused to share a platform with pro-Remain Tories.

“Good things came from Europe, but there were other issues that had not been addressed.”

Jeremy Corbyn

In the wake of the Brexit vote, the Labour leader explained his equivocal position. “The point I was making was there were good things that had come from Europe in working conditions and environmental protections but there were other issues that had not been addressed properly,” he said.

Yet his colleagues were unmoved. Today, two veteran Labour MPs submitted a motion of no confidence in Corbyn’s leadership. “He was very halfhearted about his attempts to campaign,” said one of them, Dame Margaret Hodge. “Labour voters simply didn’t get the message.”

The motion calls for a discussion at the meeting of the Parliamentary Labour Party on Monday. It represents the greatest challenge to Corbyn’s leadership so far.

