EU referendum heading for a photo finish as both sides make final push

2016-06-22

As Britain headed towards a photo finish in today’s European Union membership referendum, the rival camps mounted a desperate last-ditch drive to win over the millions of undecided voters.

The even split within the country over the biggest political choice for a generation was highlighted by an Opinium poll putting Leave on 45 per cent and Remain on 44 per cent, with a further nine per cent saying they were undecided, but would vote.

A survey for TNS gave Leave 43 per cent, and Remain 41 per cent, with 16 per cent undecided or not intending to vote. A ComRes poll had Remain on 48 per cent and Leave on 42 per cent, with 11 per cent undecided.

David Cameron joined political rivals, including former Labour deputy leader Harriet Harman, on a battle-bus tour to promise a “bigger, better Britain” by remaining in the EU.

Meanwhile, Leave champion Boris Johnson embarked on a seven-stop flight across England to declare that 23 June could be “independence day”.

Both teams will launch a massive effort to get out the vote after polling stations open at 7am today. A Remain spokesman said: “It’s too close to call, but we’re confident we have the better arguments and the superior ground operation.”

A spokesman for Vote Leave said: “I genuinely think it’s 50-50. The other side will be banking on a swing back to them, but our supporters are more motivated and more willing to go out to vote.”

On the eve of polling, the Prime Minister and his three predecessors – Gordon Brown, Tony Blair and Sir John Major – issued statements in support of Britain’s membership.

They said an unprecedented coalition from all walks of life supported Remain, including overwhelming numbers of business people, academics, scientists, economic experts, medical professionals, environmentalists, senior military and security figures, trades union bosses, farmers and faith leaders.

Mr Cameron said: “Quitting Europe is a risk to your family’s future because a vote to leave on Thursday means there is no going back on Friday.”

But Mr Johnson urged supporters in North Yorkshire to ignore “Project Fear” and “believe in our country”. He declared they were “on the verge of victory”.

Leave campaigners seized on comments by the European Commission President, Jean-Claude Juncker, who ruled out Britain getting any further concessions over EU rules if the country opts for Remain.

In his final campaign speech, the Ukip leader Nigel Farage said: “Let’s stop pretending what this European project is – they have an anthem, they are building an army, they have already got their own police force, and of course they have got a flag.

“At the end of the day, tomorrow, when people vote, they have to make a decision – which flag is theirs? I want us to live under British passports and under the British flag.”
Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn was joined yesterday by London Mayor Sadiq Khan, the First Minister of Wales Carwyn Jones and its Scottish leader Kezia Dugdale in a joint plea for a pro-EU vote.

