EU Referendum: How results will roll in, which places will declare first and times of regional counts

2016-06-22

Once you have cast your vote,  it’s time to sit and wait. The vote counts will begin to roll in from just after midnight –  Sunderland, Newcastle and the London borough of Wandsworth are expected to complete their counts first.

Foyle in Northern Ireland is also meant to be counted by around 12.30am and the City of London is also expected to be one of the first, announcing before 1am.

The last counts to be announced are Cheshire East, Arun in West Sussex, Waveney in Suffolk and Harborough in the East Midlands.

Then there’s regional results – ballot boxes are taken to one of 382 local counting venues – one for each local authority in England, Scotland and Wales, plus one for Northern Ireland and one for Gibraltar. Local counting officers then feed back their results to 12 regional counting officers, who only announce results once it’s clear for the whole region.

After 5am: North East, Northern Ireland, Wales, London and Scotland

After 6am: West Midlands, South West

After 6.30am: East Midlands, South West

7am: East, North West, South East

Pundits, politicians and people still awake will start to guess how they think the results will pan out based on whether the counts match with what was predicted prior to the referendum. People will then predict what they think will happen with the regions based on what they know from around 3.30 or 4am onwards.

However the momentous decision as to whether or not Britain will leave the European Union is not expected before 7am tomorrow. Jenny Watson, who chairs the Electoral Commission, will announce the results in Manchester “around breakfast time”.

There will be no official exit poll. The nature of a referendum – where every vote counts – raises issues of accuracy. It is very hard to get a snapshot of how the entire nation might have voted.

A number of hedge funds have commissioned private exit polls on which they will base trading ahead of the official result being announced. At 10pm (when polling stations close) the ban on exit polls being made public will be lifted and some will be published.

There’s plenty of telly if you’re too excited to sleep – expect numerous wide-eyed caffeine-addled pundits put up to examine the results as they are declared.

The BBC, ITV and Sky are all covering the election.

Election companion #1 – David Dimbleby will host BBC1’s EU Referendum – The Result Programme from 9.55pm, joined by Jeremy Vine, Emily Maitlis, Laura Kuennsberg and Kamal Ahmed. It is thought this will be Dimbleby’s final appearance hosting a results show. Historic in itself.

Election companion #2 – If you want to grab some shut-eye – wake up with Andrew Neil from 9am.

Election buddy #1 – On ITV, Tom Bradbury will host Referendum Result Live: ITV News Special from 10pm, with Robert Peston, Allegra Stratton and James Mates.

Election buddy #2 – Alastair Stewart will take over at 9am, after Good Morning Britain.

Enjoy the night with Adam Boulton, Jeremy Thompson and Kay Burley , who are presenting Sky’s coverage.

BBC Radio 4 presenters James Naughtie and Carolyn Quinn will broadcast results as they come in. BBC Radio 5 Live will have also live coverage as the results come in.

With Fran Rankin

