Labour MP Jo Cox shot and stabbed outside Leeds

2016-06-16

Labour MP Jo Cox is in a critical condition after she was shot and stabbed in an attack in her constituency near Leeds.

An eyewitness said the 41-year-old mother of two was left lying in a pool of blood on the pavement after her assailant struck in Birstall, West Yorkshire.

Hichem Ben Abdallah said: “He was kicking her as she was lying on the floor.”

He said that after a bystander intervened, the attacker produced a gun, stepped back and shot her twice.

West Yorkshire Police said a 52-year-old man has been arrested in connection with the attack, which happened near the town’s library, where the MP holds her advice surgeries.

Mr Abdallah, 56, was in the cafe next door to the library when he heard screaming and went outside.

He told the Press Association: “There was a guy who was being very brave and another guy with a white baseball cap who he was trying to control and the man in the baseball cap suddenly pulled a gun from his bag.”

He added: “He was fighting with her and wrestling with her and then the gun went off twice and then she fell between two cars and I came and saw her bleeding on the floor.”

After around 15 minutes, the shop owner said emergency services arrived and tended to her with a drip.

Her  assistant confirmed she had been attacked and said he was trying to get more information from police at the scene. The MP is believed to have been airlifted to Leeds General Infirmary.

There was speculation among some fellow MPs that Ms Cox may have been targeted over her failure to vote against air strikes in Syria.

A police helicopter is hovering above the area.

Labour Chief Whip Rosie Winterton, the MP for Doncaster Central, is reported to have told colleagues that the incident is “serious”.

Witnesses said an onlooker tackled a man to the floor and tried to take a gun from him. Moments later, a second shot was heard.

An eyewitness said: “The whole scene has been taped off. There are armed police everywhere.”

West Yorkshire police said in a statement: “At 12.53 today, police were called to a report of an incident on Market Street, Birstall, where a woman in her 40s had suffered serious injuries and is in a critical condition.

“A man in his late 40s to early 50s nearby also suffered slight injuries.

“Armed officers attended and a 52-year-old man was arrested in the area. There are no further details at present.

“Police presence in the area has been increased as a reassurance to the community.”

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn tweeted he is “utterly shocked by the news of the attack on Jo Cox”.

“The thoughts of the whole Labour Party are with her and her family at this time,” he added.

Utterly shocked by the news of the attack on Jo Cox. The thoughts of the whole Labour Party are with her and her family at this time.

— Jeremy Corbyn MP (@jeremycorbyn) June 16, 2016



David Cameron said: “Very concerned about reports Jo Cox has been injured. Our thoughts and prayers are with Jo and her family.”

Very concerned about reports Jo Cox has been injured. Our thoughts and prayers are with Jo and her family.

— David Cameron (@David_Cameron) June 16, 2016



Ms Cox is a member of the Remain campaign and spent Wednesday protesting against the ‘Brexit flotilla’ on the Thames.

The Vote Leave and Stronger In EU referendum campaigns have both been suspended in light of the shooting.

Before becoming an MP, Ms Cox worked as an adviser for Gordon Brown’s wife Sarah and Baroness Kinnock. She also worked for aid agency Oxfam for a decade and has campaigned tirelessly for the victims of the Syrian civil war.

The Cambridge graduate divides her time between a houseboat on the Thames and her home in Batley in West Yorkshire.

More follows

Originally published on our sister site The Yorkshire Post.

