UKIP Leave EU poster reported to police: what you need to know

2016-06-17

In advance of next Thursday’s EU referendum, UKIP have unveiled a poster depicting a queue of migrants being escorted to a refugee camp. Since its launch on Wednesday, the poster has courted much controversy.

A queue of migrants, most of them young males, under the slogan “BREAKING POINT: The EU has failed us all”. They have just crossed into Slovenia from Croatia (both of which are EU members). Getty Images confirmed that the photo was taken by its staff in October 2015.

A look at the original image reveals that the only prominent white person in it has been obscured in the poster by a strapline that reads “Leave the European Union on 23rd June”.

In an article for the Daily Express that coincided with the poster’s launch, UKIP leader Nigel Farage wrote of “the realities that the irresponsible free movement policies within the EU have had on people’s quality of life”.

He also condemned German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s open-door asylum policy. (Last September, Merkel announced that unregistered migrants could seek asylum in Germany, thus suspending the EU principle that migrants must claim asylum in the first country they enter. The policy was praised by many, but also blamed for a surge of immigration.)

When asked whether the people in the photo might be refugees, Farage responded, “You don’t know that… Very few people that came into Europe last year would actually qualify as genuine refugees.”

He has announced that he will be unveiling more “hard-hitting images” over the coming week.

The poster has been condemned by politicians and commentators of all stripes. Green MP Caroline Lucas accused UKIP of “using the innocent victims of a human tragedy for political propaganda”. Dave Prentis of the Unison union referred the poster to the police, describing it as a “blatant attempt to incite racial hatred”.

Within hours, Twitter users were pointing out the similarities between the poster and a still from a Nazi propaganda film, as featured in the BBC documentary Auschwitz: The Nazis and the Final Solution.

Your new poster resembles outright Nazi propaganda, @Nigel_Farage. Thanks to @brendanjharkin for pointing it out. pic.twitter.com/Rd89XZSvfD

— Connor Beaton (@zcbeaton) June 16, 2016



Significantly, the official Vote Leave campaign was quick to distance itself. Boris Johnson, one of its leaders, said that the poster is “not our campaign”, “not my politics”. Vote Leave has often clashed with Leave.EU, the rival pro-Brexit campaign, with which Farage is closely associated.

The poster is not the only referendum-related ad to draw criticism in recent weeks. Last month Operation Black Vote, an organisation that campaigns to engage non-white Brits in politics, released a poster that shows a docile old South Asian lady and a finger-wagging white skinhead balancing on a see-saw. Many – including Farage himself – condemned the image’s “divisiveness”, and its caricatures of pro- and anti-EU voters.

