Tory councillor Dominic Peacock suspended over Jo Cox Facebook comment

2016-06-21

By John Roberts

A Yorkshire councillor has been suspended for making offensive remarks on his Facebook account about the charity appeal launched in memory of murdered MP Jo Cox.

East Riding councillor Dominic Peacock made an offensive remark about making a donation.

Mr Peacock was responding to a news story about the appeal following Ms Cox’s death reaching £1 million when he posted on Facebook: “I’ve just donated the steam off my p***.”

“I’ve just donated the steam off my p***.”

Dominic Peacock

Soon after, he posted on a local Vote Leave supporting page: “I’ve deleted my offensive comment I shouldn’t have put it on in the first place – I won’t make excuses.”

Mr Peacock is one of three Tories who represent the Minster and Woodmancy ward, which covers the countryside just north of the city of Hull, on the Conservative-run council.

In a follow-up to his original post, responding to critics, Mr Peacock wrote: “I am sick and tired of this woman’s death being used against the Brexit cause.”

Stephen Parnaby, East Riding Council and Conservative group leader, said the councillor had been suspended from the group with immediate effect for “inappropriate and offensive remarks.”

He said he was going to recommend that Mr Peacock be expelled.

Mr Parnaby said: “Following inappropriate and offensive comments made on social media relating to the sad and tragic death of Jo Cox MP, I have suspended Councillor Dominic Peacock from the East Riding of Yorkshire Council Conservative Group with immediate effect. I shall be reporting this to a meeting of the full Group and my recommendation will be that he be expelled.

“Residents should expect their elected representatives to act in an appropriate and compassionate way.”

Stephen Parnaby, Yorkshire East Riding council leader

“All people in public life, irrespective of politics should be united in condemning the fatal and dreadful attack on Jo Cox. This is not the time for inappropriate remarks, however intended, and I will not tolerate them in my Group, and residents should expect their elected representatives to act in an appropriate and compassionate way.

“I will also be asking the Group to make a contribution to the Memorial Fund set up in the name of Jo Cox.”

Mr Keith Moore, deputy leader of the council’s Labour group, told The Yorkshire Post: “I believe he should be expelled from the Conservative party for such insensitive comments and vile language.”

Mr Moore said a meeting of the East Riding Council was scheduled for tomorrow, with a minute’s silence for Mrs Cox part of the agenda.

