Pride of ‘vindicated’ Starbucks employee at helping others with dyslexia

2016-06-17

discriminated against her for making mistakes due to a learning disability and took her case to an employment tribunal last year she faced a David and Goliath battle for justice.

Ms Kumulchew, 43, a supervisor at a south-west London branch of the ubiquitous coffee chain, is dyslexic. One of her duties was to take the temperature of fridges and water at specific times and enter the results in a duty roster but, after Ms Kumulchew mistakenly entered incorrect figures, Starbucks accused her of falsifying documents, which the company claimed amounted to fraud. Ms Kumulchew was given lesser duties and ordered to retrain, which left her feeling suicidal – but she was determined to clear her name.

A tribunal found Starbucks had failed to make reasonable adjustments for Ms Kumulchew’s disability and had discriminated against her because of the effects of her dyslexia. It also found she had been victimised by her employer and there appeared to be little or no knowledge or understanding of equality issues.

Ms Kumulchew, who still works for Starbucks, says she feels “vindicated” and has been “immensely encouraged” by the public support she received following the tribunal.

“I am still employed at Starbucks and I have a job that I enjoy very much,” she says.

“I thought my disability was uncommon but it was revealed to be quite the opposite. The feedback has been immensely encouraging. I have had tremendous support from all sorts of people I could never have imagined.”

Ms Kumulchew says she is proud to have “brought to light a hidden disability that’s been in the shadows for many people”.

A hearing in October will decide what compensation she is entitled to.

Ms Kumulchew’s solicitor Jenna Ide says her client’s case has helped raise awareness of dyslexia and the public response has been “remarkable”.

“Often dyslexic employees are reluctant to reveal their dyslexia or associated difficulties to their employer. However, Meseret has shown great courage and determination in her pursuit of her claim,” says Mrs Ide.

She says she hopes the increased awareness afforded by Ms Kumulchew’s case helps others open up about their dyslexia and approach their employer for support.

