Tory Eurosceptics put ‘save Dave’ plan in motion after harsh campaign

2016-06-23

Senior Tory Eurosceptics last night launched a “save Dave” operation, urging David Cameron to remain in Downing Street whatever the referendum result.

More than 80 pro-Brexiteers – including every Cabinet minister who backed Leave – signed a letter telling him that he had a “mandate and a duty” to continue as Prime Minister.

Their intervention was designed to head off a damaging bout of speculation over his position following the referendum – or the prospect of a lengthy leadership contest.

David Cameron, in the event of winning the EU referendum, was widely expected to offer an olive branch to most leading Brexiteers in an attempt to hold the warring Conservative Party together.

This is despite his personal sense of betrayal at Michael Gove’s and Boris Johnson’s decision to campaigtn for Leave.

Pro-Brexit supporters also fear that the Prime Minister’s resignation in the event of a Leave vote would exacerbate the inevitable turmoil in the financial markets.

The letter was signed by 84 MPs, including former London Mayor Boris Johnson, Justice Secretary Michael Gove, employment minister Priti Patel and Commons leader Chris Grayling, who have spearheaded the pro-Brexit campaign.

However, there were many Brexit-supporting MPs whose signatures were missing, including Bill Cash, Nadine Dorries and Andrew Bridgen. The absence of their names suggests Mr Cameron could still face demands to step down in the wake of the referendum.

Mr Grayling told Sky News: “We have put in place a broad ranging programme for government and part of that included giving the country a choice on a referendum. Now that referendum is no over. We have given people that option.

“It would be an absolute nonsense, if David Cameron felt, having given the country that choice if they take the decision he couldn’t carry on in the job. We are completely behind him staying. We want him to stay and that letter is a statement of commitment to his leadership.”

Their letter said: “We who are supporters of Vote Leave and members of the Conservative Party thank you for giving the British people a choice of their destiny on 23 June.

We believe that whatever the British people decide you have both a mandate and a duty to continue leading the nation implementing our 2015 manifesto.”

