Three girls aged 12 still in hospital after taking ecstasy pills

2016-06-20

Two girls aged 12 remain in hospital and a third was due to be sent home today after taking “Teddy Tablet” ecstasy pills aimed at children.

Police were called to Salford Precinct shopping centre in Salford just before 10pm on Saturday after reports that three girls had taken the tablets.

A woman, 26, later described seeing one of the girls shaking uncontrollably in the street.

It is imperative young people understand the implications and avoid taking drugs to stop any more young people ending up in hospital.

Detectives in Greater Manchester have issued a stark warning about the dangers of ecstasy following the incident – the latest in a series in ecstasy in the region in recent months.

Just last month, Faye Allen, 17, from Liverpool, died after taking a “Mastercard” ecstasy tablet during a dance night at the Victoria Warehouse in Trafford Park, which is across the Manchester Ship Canal from Salford.

A boy of 16 was also left in a critical condition in Oldham in May after taking an ecstasy tablet called “Rockstar”. Two women, both 21, were also taken to hospital from a Manchester nightclub after taking ecstasy pills dubbed “Lego”.

Detective Chief Inspector Chris Walker, from Greater Manchester Police’s Salford Division, said: “Sadly, three more young people, who are only 12-years-old, have taken ecstasy and ended up in hospital.

“It is imperative young people understand the implications and avoid taking drugs, to stop any more young people ending up in hospital.”

A man, 22, and a woman, 21, who were arrested on suspicion of possessing a controlled substance have been released on police bail until 15 July.

Mr Walker said: “We will continue to repeat our warnings in the hope that young people will think twice before taking drugs, after seeing they damage they cause to lives.

“People taking these drugs don’t know what they contain or what effect they will have. It isn’t worth the risk of ending up in hospital or suffering fatal consequences.

“If anyone is in possession of these tablets or other drugs, I would urge them to hand them in to police, a chemist or other medical practitioner immediately.”

