Jo Cox: a noble life given in the service of her people

2016-06-16

It takes a lot to stun a newsroom into silence – to shock editors accustomed to screening the world’s horrors from readers; correspondents who sit through hours of the grimmest court cases, or report from the scenes of atrocities.

The killing of Jo Cox, young Yorkshire MP and mother – who only yesterday tweeted a picture of her small children and husband aboard a dinghy, participating in that anti-Brexit Thames flotilla – is uniquely appalling.

How do you explain what happened yesterday afternoon in a West Yorkshire village to kids aged three and five, wondering why mummy isn’t coming home from work?

“We – the media, the public – all too often dismiss the work of MPs, dismissing them as a class set on self-profit and self-promotion”

During 13 months in Parliament, Jo Cox established a reputation as a principled, independent-minded MP who worked hard for her constituents and for humanitarian causes, like helping Syrian refugees.

Warm, spirited, popular and very smart, she was proud of her community and her family.

For reasons none of us yet understands, she was shot dead yesterday on her way to carry out one of an MP’s most important duties: meeting her constituents so that she could listen to their problems and try to help them.

The words on our front page today are Jo Cox’s own: Mum, proud Yorkshire lass, MP; the way that she described herself on her social media profile.



If you want to get a sense of where she had come from and what she stood for before this senseless slaughter, read Kate Proctor’s personal tribute, or the extraordinary statement from her husband, Brendan:

“Today is the beginning of a new chapter in our lives. More difficult, more painful, less joyful, less full of love.

“I and Jo’s friends and family are going to work every moment of our lives to love and nurture our kids and to fight against the hate that killed Jo.

“Jo believed in a better world and she fought for it every day of her life with an energy, and a zest for life that would exhaust most people.

“She would have wanted two things above all else to happen now. One, that our precious children are bathed in love; and two, that we all unite to fight against the hatred that killed her. Hate doesn’t have a creed, race or religion, it is poisonous.

“Jo would have no regrets about her life, she lived every day of it to the full.”

We – the media, the public – all too often dismiss the work of MPs, dismissing them as a class set on self-profit and self-promotion. Lazy thinking.

Jo Cox died doing her public duty in our democracy, in service to the people. We salute her.

@olyduff

