EU referendum results: Britain is about to Brexit

2016-06-24

Britain is heading towards the European exit door.

With nearly 90 per cent of results declared in the membership referendum, support for Leave was running at 51.6 per cent and Remain at 48.4 per cent.

At 5am both the BBC and Sky projected victory for the pro-Brexit campaign.

“Let June 23 go down in our history as our independence day.”

Nigel Farage

Labour said David Cameron, who strenuously argued in favour of remaining in the EU, should “seriously consider his position” if Britain voted to pull out of the EU.

The Prime Minister is expected to make a statement on the results within hours.

The results highlighted stark divisions across the United Kingdom.

Voters in London and Scotland came out in support of the EU in large numbers, but every English region and Wales came out in favour of Brexit.

Throughout a dramatic night of declarations, support for Leave consistently defied predictions and polled more strongly than forecast.

The pattern was set when one of the first areas to declare, Sunderland, backed by Brexit by 61 per cent to 39 per cent.

Within minutes the markets took fright and the value of the pound crashed by seven cents against the pound. In overnight trading sterling stood at its lowest level since 2009.

Voters in a host of large English towns and cities, including Sheffield, Middlesbrough, Coventry, Wolverhampton, Barnsley and Oldham, opted to leave the bloc.

Britain’s second largest city, Birmingham, also narrowly backed Brexit.

Large anti-EU votes were also recorded across Middle England, with electors in many areas backing Brexit by a majority of more than two to one.

By contrast voters in a series of London boroughs, including Lambeth, Wandsworth and Hackney, voted overwhelmingly to remain in the EU. Oxford, Bristol, Exeter, Manchester and Liverpool also came out in favour of Remain.

Scotland also voted convincingly in favour of staying in the EU, with Edinburgh backing Remain by a majority of three to one and Glasgow by two to one.

Six hours after the polls closed, the Ukip leader Nigel Farage said he was “daring to dream” of victory. He declared to cheering supporters: “Let June 23 go down in our history as our independence day.”

Although pro-Brexit MPs insisted David Cameron should stay on as Prime Minister in the event of a Leave vote, he will face immediate questions over his survival in Downing Street.

The shadow Foreign Secretary, Hilary Benn, said: “If there were to be a vote to Leave, then as far as the Prime Minister is concerned I don’t see how he is going to remain in his job for very long at all.”

The Brexit-supporting Tory MP, Jacob Rees-Mogg, said a general election in the autumn was “not impossible”.

The pro-Remain Work and Pensions Secretary, Stephen Crabb, said: “We struggled to really connect with the white working classes, even in those old industrial areas where European money had helped revitalise those areas and bring in new manufacturing investment.”

He said it was essential for Mr Cameron to remain in Downing Street as “there isn’t anyone else round the cabinet table or outside the cabinet who has got the leadership ability to get this country through what is going to be a challenging period in the weeks and months ahead.”

