EU referendum: nursing and doctors’ leaders speak out

2016-06-20

It may have been almost entirely overshadowed by the debate over immigration and border controls in recent days, but the issue of whether or not the NHS will benefit if the UK votes to leave the EU has never really gone away.

Banners and placards crying “Save our NHS” still appear at almost every Vote Leave campaign stop – highlighting how important Brexit campaigners believe that message to be in persuading people side with them. The contentious£350m figure the UK “sends” to Brussels can be “saved” and spent on the NHS instead, it is implied.

“The only way to ensure that the voice of nursing is heard in this decision is if nurses use their votes.”

Janet Davies, Chief Executive, Royal College of Nursing

Many people respond: who will fill the huge number of vacancies that are often filled with EU nationals, thanks to free movement of people rules, if we leave?

Nursing in particular has benefited from this central tenet. Several times a year now trusts around the country fly to EU countries, such as Spain and Portugal especially, with similar training schemes to persuade health staff to come and join the NHS.

The Brexit message has been a tough sell. Immigration is almost universally regarded as having prevented the health service from collapsing since its formation on 5 July, 1948.

On Sunday, delegates debated the impact of the European Union on the NHS at this year’s Royal College of Nursing Congress in Glasgow. It was wide ranging, with members drawing on their personal experiences and those of their patients, but one common theme emerged: the negative and divisive aspects of the referendum campaign so far.

The RCN has not taken a formal position on the referendum, instead providing a factual guide for members on how the EU has impacted nursing to date.

Under EU freedom of movement and access to services rules, some patients have taken their cases to the European courts to seek reimbursement for planned treatment they have chosen to have outside the member state they are living in – what some people refer to as “health tourism”.

Given the confusion about these rights, the European Commission and member states have sought to introduce a clearer legal framework. To achieve this, the Directive on Patients’ Rights in Cross-border Healthcare was adopted in 2011, and has been implemented in the UK, allowing patients to be reimbursed up to the amount that such treatment would have cost in their home member state.

“Anyone who attacks the contribution to this country of people from around the world, attacks us all.”

Dr Mark Porter, Council Chair, British Medical Association

The RCN gave the directive a cautious welcome, as it clarified what patients’ rights were, but was concerned about a range of issues, including continuity of care and the impact of planning and provision of services domestically.

Whatever the result of Thursday’s vote, nurses called for unity and solidarity.

“The only way to ensure that the voice of nursing is heard in this decision is if nurses use their votes,” RCN Chief Executive Janet Davies said. “Nurses must not let others make this momentous decision for them.”

The British Medical Association, which has around 150,000 members and represents doctors from all branches of medicine all over the UK, has also not taken a formal position.

But in his opening speech to the union’s annual meeting in Belfast on Monday, BMA council chair Dr Mark Porter gave a passionate defence of the impact immigration has had on the health service.

“It has been implied that those who come to this country take from us, or threaten us,” he said. “‘Close our borders’ has been the call, keep out the Europeans and while we’re at it, people from beyond Europe’s borders, whether seeking refuge or with much to offer to our society, or both.

“Anyone who attacks the contribution to this country of people from around the world, attacks us all. They attack many of us personally, but they attack every one of us, because the health service we love would not exist without their contribution.

“We are one profession… from every single country that makes the world’s greatest health service a health service that the world has built. The health service would be poorer without you. There might not even be a health service without you.

“Anyone who attacks the contribution to this country of people from around the world, attacks us all.”

