Nazi propagandists v Avengers Assemble, with Gordon Brown as Hulk

2016-06-22

At the end of the perennially horrifying movie Deliverance, one of the survivors turns to another and says shakily: “I don’t think I’ll see you for a while.” There is no such option for the British public, who have endured – at the hands of both referendum campaigns – eight weeks of what we’ll have to euphemise as unspeakable banjo music. For us, the canoe trip doesn’t end on Friday. As Nigel Farage crowed in his final Ukip campaign speech: “We’ve even changed the political language!”

Ain’t that the truth. At his own final campaign rally, David Cameron declined to hold back on Boris Johnson and Michael Gove. “Today they were comparing experts to Nazi propagandists!” he bellowed at a crowd of supporters. “That is the extent to which they’ve lost it!” Yes, more Hitler. Tell you what: the Führer’s had a great referendum campaign. Shoutouts to him must be cheaper by the dozen. Many of the major players have displayed a second world war obsession so misjudged they made Basil Fawlty look like AJP Taylor.

On Wednesday in Birmingham, it was impossible to watch Cameron shout, “Not true!”, “Not true!”, “Not true!”, about things his former close friends have said without wondering: where on earth does trust in politics go now? Après this le déluge. The entire thing has the flavour of a Bullingdon challenge that got insanely out of hand.

Faragese has hung like a psychic pall over much of the campaign, but was at least in abeyance as the prime minister descended on the Birmingham University campus with a crack team of cross-party big hitters. Think of it as Remain Avengers Assemble, with Gordon Brown as Hulk. Even Cameron knew he’d been hopelessly outclassed by the former PM’s barnstormer, opening his own effort with: “Wasn’t that a belter of a speech from Gordon Brown?” His own analogies feel increasingly bizarre. “If you jump out the aeroplane,” he explained, “you cannot clamber back through the cockpit hatch.”

There was Brown, there was Harriet Harman, there was Tim Farron, there was Paddy Ashdown, there was Caroline Lucas ... there wasn’t Jeremy Corbyn, because he refused to share a platform with Cameron. Even so, the Labour leader appears at least 60% as committed to this cause as he was to dressing up as Huggy Bear for a TV chatshow the other week.

But given that the speeches covered ground from the Somme to Bosnia to the Crimea, it all felt slightly bigger than Farage’s final rallying cry in Westminster had the same morning. Not that I hadn’t enjoyed the Ukip leader’s au courant reminder that Britain is a great sporting nation (footage of beefy Botham from 1981). Farage had again declared of a post-Brexit Ukip, “We’ll act as the canary in the mineshaft” – still failing to get what this metaphor means for the canary. Similarly, his obsession with The Great Escape does not appear to have extended to watching the movie till the end.

And so to Michael Gove – the canary in the Mein Kampf, if you will – whose journey to the heart of Nazi darkness was an act of selfless ... but no. That comparison of leave’s detractors with Third Reich scientists probably settles it. Of the housebroken politicians involved in this – not you, Nigel – Gove has been the worst. His “Britain has had enough of experts” line will haunt him down the years if there is any justice – and as the lord chancellor and secretary of state for justice, I’m sure he’d have some experty-establishmenty view as to whether there is or not.

Still, there’s always Boris, who remains the biggest star in town and began Wednesday puckering up to a fish in Billingsgate market for the cameras. It’s like the old saying goes: you’ve got to kiss a few fishes before you find your handsome prime ministerial majority. Or as Boris put it to the press pack: “I once kissed a crocodile in Australia.” (Then a plot device saw him go walkabout in New York and have to navigate that city’s perilous thoroughfares and strange local customs.) By the afternoon, he was being helicoptered round the country, declining to correct any of the transparent untruths he has told over the campaign. Contrast this with how swiftly and firmly he got on to the Sunday Times to correct the misapprehension that he dyed his hair. I guess some things just can’t be allowed to stand.

