Why Brexit makes a visceral appeal to the older generation’s psyche

2016-06-21

The grey vote is critical, and the prospect of independence takes us back to the good old days when we did things ‘our way’, unaided by Johnny Foreigner




“I still can’t make up my mind”. “Well, you’ve only got a day or two”. “No facts, that’s the problem”. “You mean, no respect, they talk as though we’re no use”. “Right, like Britain’s past it”.

It’s post-bingo cafe time, and the 

The remain camp is offering an argument that, by its focus on the nation’s dependence on support, will alienate elderly people because it resonates with our personal daily experience. As our competencies decline, we become dependent on others for help. And we resent it.

“And those careworkers, half of them don’t speak English.” Joyce threw in the curve ball.

Distasteful perhaps, but for many old people it has sharp-end cred. They are daily recipients of care from others, many of whom are migrants, and whose service – thanks to tightened budgets – is unsatisfactory. The grumbly generation doesn’t tend to distinguish between the piper and the people who pay.

The 

This menu of nostalgia and xenophobia is a toxic dish with a peculiar appeal to the elderly palate.

And 

We want our lives back, the restoration of personal dominion, so when Brexit tells us that if we leave, we will “get our country back” and restore its sovereignty, it hits the crumbly spot.

In spite of 

My generation has been cast as lead players in a major tragedy. The nightmare clouds of a perfect societal storm are massing on the horizon, for which we must hold ourselves responsible. We have already created a planetary crisis for our grandchildren, a sustained war on terror, the absence of affordable shelter, and a deficit in worthwhile and properly rewarded work.

Now, we are going to exploit our grey vote to reverse an evolutionary journey that has been characterised by the human genius for collaboration, from family to tribe to clan to state to united nations. The poet 

And I won’t be around to experience it. Along with the vast majority of my contemporaries, by the time “the bell tolls” I will be in my grave. There’s still time to change the script.

