Brexit fallout: seven ways the Leave vote could damage US interests

2016-06-24

Barack Obama had been a key voice warning that leaving the European Union could hurt Britain. But with Thursday’s shock referendum result now sinking in on his side of the Atlantic, there are growing concerns about what this seismic geopolitical event could mean for Americans too.

The International Monetary Fund recently estimated in a report published in Washington that the Brexit could knock up to half a percentage point off the combined output of all advanced economies by 2019, including the US. The IMF expects international trade and investment globally will shrink in response to the political uncertainty of an exit, especially one that may throw Britain, a key US trading partner, into sharp recession.

Turmoil in the bond market has already had a more direct impact on US monetary policy, after Janet Yellen warned that uncertainty over Brexit was a factor in the Federal Reserve’s latest decision not to raise interest rates. Wall Street grappled with volatility rarely seen since the financial crisis of 2007-08 after Britain voted in favour of leaving on Thursday, with many US banks based in the City of London on the front line.

The biggest concern in Washington is not just over the waning influence of its most important diplomatic ally within Europe, but the destabilising effect an exit could have on the continent as a whole. If other member states follow suit, the EU itself could slowly unravel, leaving it vulnerable to growing Russian economic influence and perhaps weakening Nato too. Some fear the western alliance, constructed after the second world war and a cornerstone of US influence in the world, now has a deep crack running through it.

American multinationals such as Ford and Goldman Sachs have been at the forefront of corporate calls for British voters to consider what leaving the world’s largest trading bloc might mean for inward investment. The Detroit car giant exports engines from major plants in Bridgend and Dagenham, but it is the impact on headquarters and banks in London that could be most consequential. Corporate America finds it easy to invest in the UK for many reasons, but language and culture may not be enough if British voters prove to have jeopardised London’s role as the commercial capital of Europe.

Supporters of Brexit often point to the historic ties between English-speaking nations as a reason not to fear being ostracised by Europe. But from an American perspective, it is far from clear what the benefits of this are. British influence at the European commission has helped spread Anglo-Saxon legal traditions and free market principles well beyond the Anglosphere. English could well continue to be a working language in Brussels, but the ideals and culture that suit US global interests may no longer be quite so welcome.

The most noticeable short-term consequence of Brexit is the collapse in the value of the pound, and partly the euro too, against more stable international currencies. Sterling is the lowest it’s been in 31 years, at $1.37 against the dollar. How long this lasts depends on the significance the wider trade and economic dislocations, but there is little doubt that a strong dollar is the last thing US exporters want right now. Already divergent interest rate cycles could grow worse, and fuel demands for protectionism and currency wars around the world would more than offset any short-term bonus for American tourists heading to Wimbledon.

Trade protectionism is not the only area where US domestic politics may be affected negatively by Brexit. The anti-immigration mood driving Donald Trump may have received symbolic vindication from Britain’s vote to leave the EU, possibly filling populist nationalists around the world with a sense that they are in the ascendant. UK prime minister David Cameron has been forced to resign just as Obama enters his lame-duck phase, leaving western democracies poorly equipped to respond.

