Newspaper front pages reflect that this is a truly historic day

2016-06-23

No national newspaper reader can be in any doubt that Britain’s voters will make an historic decision today.

Editors, whether neutral, favouring leave or remain, speak with one voice in urging their readers to go to the polling booths. Their front pages carry a single message: voting in the EU referendum is the most important act you will ever make in your life.

If that sounds like exaggeration, then it is something of an under-statement seen in the context of the poster-style formats employed by almost every title:

“Day of reckoning” (The Times and The Independent); “The time has come” (Daily Telegraph); “Who do we want to be?” (The Guardian); “Your country needs you” (Daily Express); “Independence day” (The Sun); “Day of truth” (Daily Mail); “Don’t make a leap into the dark” (Daily Mirror); “Historic vote on EU membership” (Financial Times); “Decision day” (City AM).

The politically neutral i underlines the importance of taking part, “On your marks, get set, vote”. Metro prefers the blander “Britain decides”, while the Daily Star, more entertainingly, tells readers to “grab your future by the ballots”.

And there you have it. History is in the making. Whether you favour remain or leave, this is a day in which a cross beside a single, simple question will determine the fate of a nation.

Of course, partisan papers were hardly going to miss the chance to make some eleventh-hour conversions in the belief, however remote, that their readers don’t know where they stand.

The Mail’s editor, Paul Dacre, is not one to leave anything to chance. So a splash claims that “four big lies” by David Cameron - “on Turkey, trade, migration and welfare” - have been “nailed.”

It reinforces its Brexit argument with seven more pages, including a page 3-style picture of Liz Hurley and a leading article that refers to “a campaign characterised by mendacity, especially from the remain camp”. (Is this a definition of irony?)

The Express weighs in with five inside pages and yet another editorial urging readers to vote leave. “The moment of destiny has finally arrived,” it begins.

“After years of growing domination by Brussels, the fate of our country now lies in the hands of the British people. At stake today is nothing short of the survival of Britain.

The outcome of the referendum will be either the trumpet blast of freedom or the death knell of our nation. If the electorate votes to leave, then we will regain our independence and self-respect...”

The Sun carries nine pages, including a dire forecast of life in Britain over the next decade should we stay in the European Union and 20 reasons to vote leave by columnist Rod Liddle.

The Telegraph offers 11 pages plus three op-ed articles all urging leave and an editorial that noses off on the previous day’s story about the Queen’s alleged question to dinner guests, asking them provide three good reasons why the UK should remain an EU member.

On the remain side, the Times runs 10 news pages plus columns on either side of the argument by David Aaronovitch (stay) and Tim Montgomerie (leave).

Its leading article refers to the outcome of vote as “momentous” following “a bruising but cathartic campaign”. And it echoes a theme noticeable in its original editorial siding with the remain argument: a continuing scepticism about the wisdom of maintaining EU membership.

The Mirror, in a succession of four spreads, reinforces its long-held remain message, but an editorial acknowledged that some of its readers disagree with its line.

On the “vexed issue of migration”, it says, “we understand fully people’s genuine concerns.” Despite them, however, “the Leavers haven’t a clue about how they’d cut the numbers coming to Britain.”

The paper continues: “The terrible truth is the only way the slippery Leavers would reduce the number is by wrecking the British economy.” It’s a brave editor who dares to confront readers with uncomfortable truths. Well done to Lloyd Embley for that.

And the Guardian? It didn’t feel the need to repeat its arguments in favour of remain. That’s called treating one’s readers like adults.

