Investors bet on remain as polling day trading lifts sterling and shares

2016-06-23

Investors have put their money on a remain vote in the EU referendum, as polling day trading lifted the pound to a new high for 2016 and the FTSE 100 rose to a two-month peak.

As the market exuberance of recent trading sessions continued, there were fresh warnings that investors were setting themselves up for heavy losses in the event of Brexit when the outcome of the vote became clear on Friday.

In morning trading on Thursday, the pound broke through $1.49 against the dollar for the first time since December, before easing back in the afternoon. The FTSE 100 index of leading shares added a solid 1.2%, or 77 points, to close at 6338, the highest since late April.

“Clearly the key issue now for currency markets is whether rising expectations that the status quo will prevail are well-placed,” said Chris Saint, senior analyst at the financial firm Hargreaves Lansdown.

“Most of the results from the local counting areas are expected by the early hours of Friday morning with the official outcome anticipated by around breakfast time. Dramatic exchange rate swings are to be expected regardless of the result, with a sharp drop in the pound’s value possible in the event of a Brexit.”

Shares and the pound were higher from the open and got an extra fillip in morning trading after the publication of an Ipsos Mori poll for the Evening Standard newspaper showed a four-point lead for remain.

The poll, which was conducted before voting began, helped lift sterling more than 1.5% to $1.4948 against the dollar. In later trading it had come off highs but was still up 0.6% on the day at $1.4799.

“Even though we all know that polls can be rubbish, the markets seem quite happy that the remain camp has done enough to win,” said Kathleen Brooks, research director at the spread-betting firm City Index.

The FTSE and pound have been buffeted by close opinion polls during the campaign but in the past week market sentiment has swung to show growing confidence in a vote to remain in the EU. The FTSE has rallied every day this week and by Thursday’s close was up 5.3% for the week so far.

The FTSE’s gains were mirrored on other European bourses, with the leading share indices in Germany and France both up almost 2%. On Wall Street, the Dow Jones industrial average was up 1% at the time of the London close.

With polling stations open from 7am to 10pm, there were strict rules for broadcasters that meant they could not report details of campaigning until voting ended. The relative quiet following months of daily referendum news made for a tense atmosphere on City trading floors, said Joshua Mahony, an analyst at the online trading company IG.

“Amid restrictions to broadcasters, there is an eerie feeling in the City, with a nervous energy evident as we await the fate of the nation,” he said.

“Whatever the result, volatility is likely to be the name of the game and rumours of private exit polls from the hedge funds means that there is likely to be some substantial swings as speculative positions are placed into a relatively illiquid market.”

