Is Britain the most Eurosceptic country?

2016-06-23

Britain may have endured the tightest of EU referendum campaigns, but historical polling suggests it may not be the most Eurosceptic state in the EU.

A survey of 10,000 Europeans across 10 countries by Pew Research earlier this year found that a majority of people felt unfavourably towards the union in Greece (71%) and France (61%). Spain also had a higher proportion of unfavourable people (49%) than the UK (48%) did.

Change the question, though, and you get a different answer. Eurobarometer, a survey of every member state in the EU, asks each year whether the public think being in the EU is good or bad for their country.

The Danish state broadcaster, DR, compiled 40 years of these surveys and it is well worth taking the time to look at how different countries’ views have changed.

The Nordic states, for example, have gone from begrudging the union to being much more positive about its effect than the majority of other countries. Crisis-hit countries such as Italy, Cyprus and Greece were all once much more positive about the EU than they are now. However, the key thing here is that not one member state – including Britain – had more EU detractors than supporters.



In fact, according to this study, positive attitudes about the EU’s effect have actually been rising in most member states after they hit a low in the middle of 2011. This is not necessarily contradictory. You can hate the colour and the size of your bicycle but still feel that it is better than having to walk everywhere.

However, another poll by Ipsos Mori, also this spring, seems to suggest that Britain’s referendum is being looked upon with envy by other countries.

It showed a majority in Italy and France said they would like a vote on their membership of the EU. In the six other countries Mori polled, more people were in favour of a referendum than not, including in Germany, Spain, Belgium and Sweden.

Asked how they would vote if a hypothetical referendum were to take place, 48% in Italy said they would vote to leave.

Despite the rise of Eurosceptic parties such as Syriza in Greece and the True Finns in Finland, there are no referendums imminent anywhere else in Europe. Nevertheless, if diplomats in Brussels wake up to news that Britain has become the first member state voting to leave the EU, this data suggests that might be the first of a series of headaches.

Methodology: data comes from the Pew Global Attitudes Survey. Polls quoted in the chart were a mixture of telephone and face-to-face interviews with samples of at least 999 in each case. The surveys were conducted by TNS BRMB on behalf of the Pew Research Center between early April and mid-May. The specific methodology used in each country is available here.

Eurobarometer: The figures used in the chart come from Eurobarometer 84, which was a survey conducted by the TNS opinion and social consortium on the request of the European commission. Fieldwork took place between 7 and 17 November, and 27,681 people were interviewed across all 28 EU member states. Samples were over 1,000 in every country except Malta, Cyprus and Luxembourg where they were over 500. Ipsos Mori: The study is based on interviews with 11,030 (between 500 and 1,005 per country) adults aged 16-64 in Australia, Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Great Britain, Hungary, India, Italy, Poland, South Africa, Spain, Sweden and the United States. Data are weighted to age, gender, region, and household income based on recent census and/or population figures for each country. Interviews were conducted via Ipsos Global @dvisor Online Omnibus between 25 March and 8 April 2016.

