Beat the Brexit effect when buying your holiday money

2016-06-18




 vote to leave the EU could see sterling plunge on the money markets later this week. For holidaymakers heading to the Med, it is likely that when they swap their pounds for euros they will not receive anywhere near as much as they enjoyed last summer. So what, if anything, can you do to protect yourself?

This week the exchange rate was down to around €1.26 compared with €1.42 in August last year. So you are getting around €160 less for every £1,000 of spending money than you were back then.

But the prediction among some economists is that the pound could fall another 10% against the euro and 15% against the dollar if the vote on Thursday takes Britain out of the EU. That suggests an exchange rate of just €1.14 to the pound, which would make holidays in Spain 20% more expensive than last year.

But it is worth bearing in mind that currency fluctuations aren’t just a referendum-linked phenomenon. The value of the pound against the euro is continually shifting. Two years ago, in June 2014, for example, holidaymakers were only getting €1.23 to the pound and just €1.18 in March 2013. Back in June 2005, however, you were getting around €1.5 to the pound.

“In real terms, if you are exchanging £1,000 of travel money you will get £40 (about €51) more today than you would have two years ago, and £84 (about €106) more than three years ago,” says Ian Strafford-Taylor, chief executive of travel money specialist FairFX.

To lock into currently available exchange rates and protect yourself against any potential further decline, you can either buy currency now or load it on to a prepaid currency card.

If you plump for buying currency, shop around for the best-value. Exchange rates offered online tend to be the best, but make sure you leave enough time for it to be delivered and are happy with the rules and regulations of the agent. Also make sure you are satisfied with the security of the company before you agree to buy, because if it folds there is often no protection.

One way to find the best buy is to use Moneysavingexpert.com’s 

Another way to lock into an exchange rate is to load money on to a prepaid travel card. You do this before you travel and use it like a debit card to spend or withdraw cash. But unlike debit and credit cards, which calculate the exchange rate on the day you spend, a prepaid card uses the rate on the day you load it. You’re quids in if the pound weakens after you load the card, but if the pound strengthens you lose out.

There are many prepaid cards on the market with wide variations in fees, exchange rates and terms and conditions. The top three, according to Moneysavingexpert, are:

 The 

 The tried and tested 

 The new 

Note that prepaid cards are not covered by the Financial Services Compensation Scheme, so you could lose money if the backing bank or building society went bust.

While these cards say they are accepted anywhere you see the MasterCard or Visa symbol, there are some notable exceptions. Most car hire places will not accept them, nor will many petrol stations or motorway toll booths. Also, some cards have a lot of fees, including an “inactivity fee” for not using them.

