We are in the fight of our lives to avoid the damage Brexit would cause

2016-06-22

On Thursday the country will go the polls to decide Britain’s future in the European Union and our place in the world. We are in the fight of our lives to avoid the damage that leaving would mean. What is at stake are not only people’s jobs, future investment in our industries, and businesses and tariff-free trade in the single market, but also our security and how we exercise influence for good in an increasingly interdependent world.

This choice goes to the heart of what really gives us sovereignty and control as a nation. It was the same debate 41 years ago in the first referendum we had on Europe. At that time, like most of the Labour party and the trade union movement, I was against remaining in the common market. We lost the argument and then went on a political journey that changed our minds.

We came to see the benefits for working people of common employment rights, guaranteed throughout the EU to prevent a race to the bottom. We worked together in practical ways to make cleaner beaches, protect the environment and ensure consumer rights. We also saw the world change and new challenges emerge – such as flows of refugees and climate change – which can only be managed by working together with our European neighbours. And we came to understand better how the European idea had brought peace to our continent out of the ashes of two world wars.

It is a union that has also brought prosperity. It has helped protect our security and has made us among the most stable and safest countries in the world in which to live. Indeed, if all of humankind could cooperate, trade and work together as the nations of the EU have done, then there would be more peace, prosperity and progress on this earth.

And being in the EU has given Britain a stronger voice in the world. Britain leads in Europe, from trade to climate change, from good governance to debt relief for the poorest nations, and in turn Europe helps to lead the world. All that is now at risk.

Who would have won and who would be in control if we left? Nigel Farage, a free-market Thatcherite who has said he would like to privatise the NHS; Michael Gove, the man most responsible for chaos in the planning of school places, but who then has the nerve to blame the EU when parents ask why their children can’t get their first choice school; Iain Duncan Smith, the architect of the cruel bedroom tax that affects nearly 2,000 families on low incomes in my constituency, but who now claims to be their champion; and Boris Johnson who wants to scrap the social chapter and weaken workers’ rights. Why should anyone believe them when they claim they want to put people in control – their track record tells us that their mission is nothing less than Thatcherism on steroids?

If we leave, we would be handing control over to a Tory government beholden to its Eurosceptics. And who would pay the price? It would be workers, businesses, consumers, the vulnerable and, ultimately, the nation.

The truth is that leaving the EU would weaken our economy and our national sovereignty by reducing our power to influence events in an ever more complex world.

Would it help us have a more peaceful and secure Europe? Would it help us stop dangerous climate change, which affects us all and has no regard for sovereignty? Would it make us more secure when we know that working together is the best protection against aggression and terrorism? Would it help us make the most of the wonders that lie ahead as science and technology, industry and ideas change the world in ways we can only dream of? The answer to all these questions is no.

For us, now, to turn our face away from that cooperation and away from the control it helps give us, would not only be a catastrophic mistake for our country but would make us poorer and less influential – and so would undermine the life chances of our children and our grandchildren. Why on earth would we want to do that?

What will help deal with all these things, as Europe’s experience shows, is building relationships with other nations and sharing some of our sovereignty with others to our mutual benefit. Compare Europe now with Europe at the time of the last referendum. Britain is at the heart of a union of 28 democracies working together; a union that has proved what human beings can achieve when we replace conflict with cooperation and enmity with dialogue.

This achievement is something worth fighting for – and the way to make sure it is protected is to vote remain on Thursday.

