A rainy day in June, an enormous moment for Britain's place in Europe

2016-06-23

Long queues in the rain lent a quintessentially British air to a historic EU referendum polling day, with many voters forced to navigate flooded streets to determine the nation’s path.

Downpours hit London and parts of south-east England overnight and early in the morning on Thursday, with some polling stations forced to move to drier ground. The rain restarted in the afternoon, with storms forecast throughout the evening. The determined, however, were not deterred.

There were reports of early queues across the UK as once-in-a generation votes were cast. A launderette and shipping container among the more unusual makeshift polling stations, along with schools, village halls, church rooms and tearooms.

The public library in Birstall, West Yorkshire, where MP Jo Cox was fatally shot and stabbed seven days ago, served as a polling station and hosted a vigil for the murdered Labour politician at lunchtime. The nearby Batley town hall, its steps still decked in floral tributes, also provided a venue for locals to the cast their vote.

As leading campaigners took the last few steps of a bitter and bruising four-month journey, there were no exit polls to buoy or dismay them.

One of the last polls, a phone survey by Ipsos Mori, which was conducted in the days before the referendum, gave remain a four-point lead. Believed to be the first poll ever published on a polling day, it put remain at 52% and leave on 48%. All final phone polls had shown remain in the lead, whereas the majority of online polls had called it for leave.

An inscrutable David Cameron swept into the polling station at Methodist Hall, Westminster, with his wife, Samantha. “Good morning,” he said to waiting media, ignoring questions on the weather and whether he was feeling confident.

The justice secretary, Michael Gove, who had already voted by post, accompanied his wife, the journalist Sarah Vine, to their north Kensington polling station and declared himself “quite excited”.

The Ukip leader, Nigel Farage, was in provocative mode. Speaking outside his Kent home, he said he believed the leave camp had a very strong chance. “But it’s all about turnout and those soft remainers staying at home,” he added, presumably referencing the weather.

The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, voting in his Islington constituency, smiled as he was asked if he was feeling confident. “Extremely. It’s a very good day,” he said. On the outcome, he joked: “You could either check the wind or check the bookies. The bookies usually get it right. I cost them a lot of money,” referring to the very long odds on his party leadership chances.

There was little early sign of leave campaigner Boris Johnson, as he was attending his daughter’s graduation ceremony in St Andrews, Scotland. Later, when asked if he was feeling confident as he waited to board a flight from Edinburgh to London, Johnson said: “I think the polls have been very close. From what I have heard and all the information is that turnout is good in areas where we need it to be.”

A record number of voters were eligible to take part in the referendum, with the Electoral Commission putting the number at 46,499,537 across the UK and Gibraltar. A poll for the Electoral Reform Society found 67% of people said they would definitely vote, slightly higher than the 66% turnout at the 2015 general election.

Voting was “brisk” in Northern Ireland, where unofficially it was said it could be as high a 70%, although later figures suggested that voting was slow in republican districts and higher in unionist ones.

In London, where the equivalent of one month’s rain fell overnight in the capital, Kingston-upon-Thames council moved two polling stations in Chessington and New Malden. Nearby Merton council tweeted a video of a waterlogged walkway outside the Sacred Heart school polling station in New Malden, advising voters to “wear your wellies”.

Polling stations in Barking and Newham in east London were difficult to access because of flood water. Ben March said people were “hitching up their trousers and wading through water” to vote at Grange primary school in Newham.

London fire brigade said it had taken more than 550 weather-related emergency calls and attended more than 400 incidents.

The weather later led to severe delays on some train lines, sparking concern on the part of some commuters that they would struggle to get home in time to vote.

Pictures posted on social media showed plenty of queues. “I took a picture of the queue at around 8.30am and it was the longest queue to a polling station I have ever seen,” said Mauro Murgia, who lives opposite a polling station in west Hampstead.

Glastonbury-goers had been warned in advance by festival founder Michael Eavis to arrange postal or proxy votes as Worthy Farm has no polling station. There was still confusion among some ticket holders, however, over whether they could vote on site. One user tweeted: “My son asked how to vote if you are at a festival. My answer is I don’t know.”

“Unfortunately there are no polling stations on site this year,” came the quick reply from the Glastonbury festival account.

The Scilly Isles was racing Sunderland to be the first place to have a result. Usually election ballot boxes are taken to the mainland for counting. In this instance, the counting will be carried out on St Mary’s and, with just 1,700 eligible voters, should not take long.

Only two UK referendums have had higher turnouts than recent general elections, according to the Institute for Government: the one on the Good Friday agreement in Northern Ireland in 1998 (81.1%) and the vote on Scottish independence in 2014 (84.6%).

As polling stations threw open their doors, shares hit their highest level since late April and sterling hit a 2016 high before falling back in the afternoon.

Stock market traders were braced for a crucial night. Joe Rundle, head of trading at ETX Capital, said: “If there is a Brexit, there could be mayhem in the markets and traders could well have to cancel their plans and work right through the weekend. We could easily see an emergency trading session on Sunday like in 2008 and/or a temporary halt to trading on Friday.”

As traders work through the night, they will be looking at privately commissioned exit polls to give them an advantage. Hedge funds and investment banks are said to have commissioned the polls to find out the voting patterns early on Thursday. By predicting the result, entrepreneurial traders can lay big bets on the result, hoping to be the first to benefit financially from a swing in sterling, the Financial Times has reported (£).

“Hedge funds have asked for exit polls and for hourly polls on the day. Banks are certainly commissioning polls for their own consumption that are never released,” said one pollster.

According to the Centre for Economic and Business Research, the economy would see a “mini-boom” after the referendum, with some delayed investment decisions likely to go ahead whatever the result.

The referendum has been making the news beyond Britain. In China, the Global Times, published by the ruling Communist party’s official People’s Daily, warned that Britain could lose its global influence if it left the EU.

In a front-page love letter, Germany’s Bild newspaper promised that if Britons voted to stay, not only would Germans not hog hotel sunloungers, they would ban froth on beer and even recognise Geoff Hurst’s controversial extra-time goal in the 1966 World Cup final.

The referendum dominated Italy’s front pages, with La Repubblica and business daily Il Sole 24 Ore running the headlines “Europe’s longest day”. “Today Britain can split Europe,” read the headline of Norway’s Aftenposten newspaper

Landmark buildings in Europe lit up in support of remain: Madrid city hall was lit up in red, white and blue; the Michelangelo statue of David in Florence, Italy, wore a union flag toga, while the Palace of Culture and Science in Warsaw, Poland, projected the flag on to its front.

Not everything went smoothly. Several people in Leighton Buzzard turned up with polling cards to discover their names were not on the electoral register. Central Bedfordshire council moved swiftly to make alternative arrangements for those affected, which included sending a car to a local hospital to collect one person prevented earlier from voting, to ensure they were able to cast their vote before 10pm.

Travellers hit by the French air traffic controller strike also appeared to suffer problems. Guardian journalist Maya Wolfe-Robinson tweeted:

So I'm stranded in Italy due to French air traffic control strikes&unable to vote.Apparently others in same position

Conspiracy theorists, using the hashtag #useapen, urged Brexit supporters not to vote using the pencils provided in voting booths, warning voters to take a pen in case ballots were tampered with. East Northants council tweeted back, warning:

Please use a pencil on your ballot paper as ink can smudge when its folded which could make the paper doubtful & it may not be counted

The council later said:

Following @ElectoralCommUK advice feel free to use a pen but make sure it doesn't smudge when folding so it is clear how you have voted 1/2

Betting on the outcome swung behind remain during the day. Betfair put the odds of staying at 2/13 while William Hill said remain was their 2/9 favourite. William Hill spokesman Graham Sharpe told the Press Association it expected to take more than £3m in bets on the referendum and for stakes to total more than £20m across the industry.

