Richard Branson starts his own campaign to keep Britain in the EU

2016-06-20

Sir Richard Branson is stepping up his pro-EU efforts, launching a nationwide campaign to urge people to back remain and warning of the economic and political pitfalls of a Brexit vote.

The billionaire founder of the Virgin empire – who does not have the right to vote in the UK – is launching the campaign on Monday. He lives in the British Virgin Islands but pointed out that the Virgin businesses, which span financial services and gyms, employ 50,000 people in the UK.

Branson said: “As an entrepreneur I have been known for taking risks throughout my career, but leaving the European Union is not one of the risks I would want the UK to take – not as an investor, not as a father and not as a grandfather. I am deeply concerned about the impact of leaving.”

He has registered his campaign with the Electoral Commission, which suggests he intends to spend more than £10,000 on his efforts to win support for the remain side.

“Although I’ve been living in the British Virgin Islands for some time now, I have never stopped caring passionately about the UK and its great people,” Branson said.

He also pointed to other benefits of the EU, saying: “My father Ted fought in North Africa, Italy and Germany during world war two. My grandfather survived the horrors of the trenches in world war one. I truly believe that one of the EU’s greatest achievements is that it has kept its members out of conflict in Europe.”

The business community is not unanimous on remaining in the EU, however, with 37 pro-Brexit business leaders writing in the Sun on Sunday to say the country can survive outside the “energy-sapping” European project.

A Virgin spokesperson said: “Richard has lived overseas for some years and so he’s not on the electoral register. Richard’s children and grandchildren live in the UK and clearly as an investor Richard has interests in the UK, with Virgin businesses employing over 50,000 people. Richard is urging every single one of them to vote in.”

