Politicians’ pact with the electorate lies shattered – trust has gone

2016-06-19

Right from the outset, the European Union has been the work of a political class, talking a kind of doublespeak, cradling their ambitions in a web of deceptions, diluting democracy, running what the late Hugo Young called in This Blessed Plot: Britain and Europe from Churchill to Blair: “an under-invigilated network of national bureaucracies”. In whose interest?

The youngest person eligible to vote in the 1975 referendum is now nearly 60. In that time, for too many, the pact with the electorate that work is rewarded by fair pay, just redistribution, decent housing and long-term security has been destroyed. Protection for the working man and woman has been stripped away and trade unions battered while the dominance of profit and the price tag has desperately undermined vocation and fraternity as industry and finance have been deregulated. At the same time, the neoliberal “truth” that “free” markets rectify themselves has proved, instead, to be a licence for unmitigated greed on a scale encapsulated by the BHS debacle.

The Edelman Trust Barometer, which conducts annual public attitudes surveys, said in January that among the wealthier in Britain (earning more than £100,000), there was 54% trust in government, compared with only 26% in households on annual incomes of under £15,000. Labour hasn’t any claim to a greater reserve of faith than the Tories. In Tony Blair’s election address in 1983, he adopted the official Labour party line, describing withdrawal from the EEC as necessary because it had “drained our natural resources and destroyed jobs”. Later, he explained he hadn’t really meant it.

When TheCityUK, which lobbies on behalf of financial and professional services, says that remaining in the EU has “nothing to do with politics, simply the money” and the terms on which international companies flourish in the UK, as David Charter reports in Au Revoir, Europe, the public knows that means the EU ideals of peace and prosperity are for an elite, not for the majority.

Yet when employment minister Priti Patel, on the side of Brexit, talks of “just” halving “the burden of EU social and employment legislation” to deliver a £4.3bn boost to our economy, the public – over four million in insecure jobs – knows who will benefit most from the “flex appeal” of Britain.

How this division between what some politicians say and how citizens live manifests itself most clearly in the communities that have been pathologised as working-class bigots, starved of resources and work, and have witnessed the stealing of their citizens’ right to be heeded. These are Ukip’s “left behind” who are most likely to experience the arrival of a concentration of immigrants in numbers and impact that most, but not all, politicians fail to acknowledge. The top 10% have no experience of living in a neighbourhood reshaped by the arrival of immigrants, often positively, but sometimes not as pressures on services increase with spending cuts.

We need immigration, we need to manage it better and invest more. In Becoming British, Thom Brooks points out that over two decades, there have been 11 ministers and eight changes of name to what is now the minister for security and immigration. That doesn’t instil confidence.

So, which way to vote? The dilemma is plump with paradoxes, not least that pro-EU politicians even in this campaign have failed to extol the advantages that the union has brought because doublespeak has become such a habit. Last month, for instance, the TUC published 20 EU measures that have improved the quality of women’s lives, including equal pay for work of equal worth and greater maternity and part-time workers rights.

Sovereignty is the cry, but it ought to be survival – for the ordinary man and woman. Out of the EU, the multinational corporations that truly rule will have little opposition; the few strands of legislation that offer protection to us citizens will be shredded. Remain isn’t much of an option but, given a very strong dose of democratisation, as the former Greek minister Yanis Varoufakis advocates, it hands David a sling against the Goliath of avaricious global capitalism and, perhaps, a future.

