How do I ... make sure Britain remains a member of the EU?

2016-06-20

The Guardian advocates voting remain in Thursday’s EU referendum. Here’s what you can do to support the cause

 

 and 




Time is running out to stop Britain leaving the 

Recent polling shows that a third of voters may change the way they vote or make up their minds in the final week, with half deciding on the day, according to 

With this in mind, remain campaigners are redoubling their efforts. Here’s how you can 

Given the nature of the referendum, just one vote could see us jettisoning the EU. A campaign called Talk to Gran is encouraging young people to speak to older relatives about why Britain remaining part of the EU is important for their futures. This relies on the assumption that older people are more likely to vote.

The campaign group Another 

“It’s not just about organised groups. Referendum campaigns often inspire people who were not previously active in politics to get involved. The key to winning the referendum will be getting out there and talking to people who are on the fence and persuading them that they should vote and back the progressive case for ‘in’,” the group says.

Young people are more likely to support the UK remaining a member of the EU but much less likely to vote. The 7,692,318 women and 7,782,178 men aged 18-35 in the UK could swing the vote if they turn out on polling day.

, against 29% who want to leave. Almost the reverse is true with voters aged 55 and over. Given that over-55s make up a bigger slice of the electorate and they are more likely to vote, they hold a disproportionate weight in deciding Britain’s future relationship with the EU. 

Make sure the young people you know vote – you could even offer them a lift to the polling station. 

The influence of friends and family must not be underestimated. A personal appeal to remain in the EU read on a social media account is much more engaging than a post from a politician or a link to a piece by a newspaper columnist. 

If you can’t think of what to write, there are some compelling posts doing the rounds including 

You could also copy and paste a paragraph from 

Given social media is a useful way of persuading friends and family, you could use this 

Unlike other elections, referendum campaigning is something that may appeal to a much broader demographic and for this reason organisers are keen to make participation inclusive. 

“Whether you’re young or old, a newcomer to politics or a seasoned campaigner, this is the time to get involved. Whether it’s leafleting, helping out on polling day itself, talking to your friends and family or making a donation, there’s a way for everyone to get involved,” says James McGrory, 

 says it will pair volunteers with more experienced campaigners to help them feel welcome and confident making arguments. “You can say what you’d rather do, if face to face is intimidating, and you’ll always have someone with you who has done it before. People can help in phone banks, if there’s a language barrier – you can help with leafleting,” a spokeswoman said.

On the website 

Another Europe has put together 

Listings and maps of local events jointly organised with Momentum, including door-knocking in High Wycombe and stalls at Newcastle Haymarket, are posted on their 

