Gove savours beef with Farage, and Johnson finds Osborne souring

2016-06-21

Schisms in the EU, post-fact world, as rival factions sharpen their referendum blades

Contact author




all off the search. The most outrageous official lie of the entire referendum campaign has now been told: 

That Hurley’s performances are primarily used in EU black sites on behalf of the CIA is a fact that cannot possibly have escaped the justice secretary’s attention – but then, he lives in a post-fact world. The sadness is that he declined to respond to the news on Tuesday that 

Even so, I’m really looking forward to episodes of the TV series Behind the Music on the various referendum campaigns. The rival leave factions are now resembling one of the more Byzantine hair metal feuds. The Axl Rose in all this – the guy even people on the pain reliever Percocet can’t work with – is 

They’ve all got beef with Farage. “I shuddered,” said Gove over the Ukip leader’s Breaking Point 

Today it was the turn of 

So there you have it: there are good Brexit votes and bad Brexit votes – and Boris doesn’t want the bad ones. It all had something of the flavour of the Chris Morris Brass Eye sketch in which he differentiated between “good Aids” and “bad Aids”. Then again, it was in an even earlier incarnation, as the psychopathic news anchor on The Day Today, that Morris underscored that 

Is this EU vote farce repeated as history? Boris certainly plays Wembley arena on Tuesday night (think of it as the referendosseum), while the BBC announces that they could have filled their mega 

As for the gladiatorial battle therein, Boris’s classicism is a little more refined than Russell Crowe’s (though equally self regarding). But let’s hope he opts to turn to the audience after finishing off fellow panellist Francis O’Grady and demanding: “Are you not entertained? ARE YOU NOT ENTERTAINED? Is this not why you are here?” Only for a lone voice in row W to pipe up: “No, I thought it was a Motley Crue gig.”

Maximus had a little more at stake on his outings, of course. On Tuesday Boris declared he’d go on TV to apologise if Brexit caused a recession. Which certainly turns an out result into a win-win for, say, the people of Wearside, whose loss of a 

 And yet, for all Johnson’s sweet attempts to level the playing field in this way, it is difficult to escape the impression that the referendum is being contested by people so financially insulated that they have nothing to lose bar a kitchen supper invitation. Cameron’s former buddy 

Boris is calling the chancellor a liar with the sarcastically exaggerated diffidence you imagine he deployed when George Osborne was known to fellow Bullingdon Club members as Oik on account of his only having attended St Paul’s. “I hope I wasn’t too strong,” Boris fretted hammily on LBC, after some mildly exasperated criticism of Osborne. The former London mayor’s family might have come out for remain in the EU. “I think they’re all secret Brexiters,” he chuckled, “but anyway … ”

 Elsewhere, much has been made of the schism between the Goves and the Camerons, given that Gove’s wife, the Daily Mail columnist Sarah Vine, is godmother to the Camerons’ youngest child. But even that feels like little more than just another warning to those weirdo careerists who make work friends godparents to their children. 

It was the same with Rupert and 

And so with the Goves and Camerons, who may never again break homemade focaccia in a kitchen that is better than Ed Miliband’s. I mean, I’m sure it’ll make the Conservative 

