EU referendum: our panel on Jeremy Corbyn's Sky News appearance

2016-06-20

Popular opinion has it that the Labour leader ‘hasn’t been doing very much’ during the campaign – can he turn the tide?

, 




At times, it was hard to tell which side 

When, towards the end of his appearance, the 

Then again, Corbyn was never going to be the most convincing advocate for Britain remaining in the EU. As he was reminded by Sky’s Faisal Islam, he has a history of euroscepticism stretching back to 1975 when he voted in favour of coming out. Had this referendum been held before Corbyn became leader of the Labour party there is little doubt which side he would have supported.

As a result, it was hardly surprising that on 

From time to time, Corbyn realised that his job was to shore up support for the EU among 

“He’s not been doing very much, has he?” offered Sky’s Kay Burley. In fact, over the last few weeks, Corbyn has been up to rather more than the received media narrative of a leader gone awol would suggest: talking to audiences round the country and offering his singular take on the referendum, which has seemed increasingly tangential as the conversation has grown more heated and polarised.

What happened at Sky’s “rooftop restaurant” in the wake of 

The trouble is, those people are not really the issue in the Labour part of this referendum. As Corbyn’s minutes ticked on, I waited to find out whether an audience of young people might nonetheless produce a challenge to his position from someone representing the alienated working class voters who are refusing to toe the Labour line. An audience member called Ryan came the closest, but under pressure of time, the exchange never went anywhere. I wanted a reply from Corbyn with some kind of oomph: an impassioned tribute to the everyday contribution made by the droves of migrant workers demonised in recent weeks, perhaps. But it failed to materialise, an absence highlighted by his rambling closing statement and tendency to such formulations as “the quite frankly appalling situation we have at the present time”.

Out in the fields, the kind of irate leavers I have met over the last three weeks would have been unmoved. Fortunately for Labour, they presumably have better things to do than watching Sky News on a Monday night.

Well, it took him a while to get started, and Corbyn was pretty shaky at first. He seemed unable to stop doling out insults. He thought people should start being “a bit kinder and a bit more intelligent”. He expected that in the next couple of days the public would “catch on and get interested”. In reply to a question about whether people grasped the meaning of 

God, it was refreshing, hearing someone getting into the detail, instead of making endless referral to well-worn slogans, stock phrases and snark. Having hinted that he thought the public were idiots, unlike all those politicians who flatter to deceive and never stop telling us how clever we are, Corbyn actually talked as if he assumed people were indeed kind and intelligent, had caught on and become interested and did understand what the referendum was all about.

He was good in stating some of the things he thought were wrong with 

Corbyn emphasised that exploitative employers were the enemy, not migrant workers. He emphasised that warlords were the enemy, not refugees. But he didn’t do enough to close up the disconnect between the dreamer who longs for a better world and the struggling citizen who longs for a better feeling of stability and community. He’ll have pleased his friends. He may even have made a few. But Frightened of Tunbridge Wells wouldn’t have been impressed.

