How can we heal a nation divided by the referendum?

2016-06-23

“Confusing” is the word that our BritainThinks focus groups, held for the Guardian earlier this month, used most often to describe the referendum campaign as it entered its final few days. “Remain leaners” in Brighton and “Leave leaners” in Knowsley all reported that they were struggling to place themselves in the debate: to see what difference it would make to their lives and to the lives of their families. Asked to bring along a symbol to sum up events so far, one chose a pair of sunglasses (“it’s hard to see clearly”), and another a megaphone (“both sides are just shouting and shouting”).

That is where the consensus ends, however. Although the polls are inconclusive when it comes to predicting Thursday’s outcome, they all do agree about how strongly voters disagree. People who incline one way or the other tend to fall into tightly defined and differentiated groups.

“Leavers” are older, working class and with few formal qualifications. They are more likely to live in the Midlands or the north of England, and less likely to own their own home. They remember the world before the EU and it didn’t stop spinning. By contrast, “Remainers” are younger, educated – often to a higher level, middle class and likely to live in London or Scotland. Europe has always been a feature of their lives and they would like it to stay that way.

Remainers tend to holiday abroad, while Leavers stay at home.

We asked people in our focus groups to describe a typical Leaver and typical Remainer. The Brighton-based remain leaners describe Remainers as well-travelled idealists who care about the environment, “Maybe they think that the world is a better place if we unite rather than separate ourselves,” said one. Our leave leaners in Knowsley see Remainers differently. They are “students who just want to be cool”, and are so affluent that they are unaffected by the decision: “Someone really rich like Chris Martin from Coldplay,” was one suggestion.

Remain leaners see Leavers in an almost wholly unattractive light: nationalistic, even xenophobic, backward looking. “I keep thinking of someone who starts every sentence with ‘back in the day’,” explained one.

By contrast, leave leaners themselves are rather more complimentary, describing fellow leavers as “brave” people prepared to stand up for what they believe in, and concerned about the EU’s impact on stretched resources, especially public services. Leavers may well work in the NHS themselves, speculated one.

The demographic differences are stark, but the attitudinal differences are greater still. Young Remainers see immigration as a positive, and many aspire to live abroad themselves. Some feel that we should take a more compassionate approach to refugees. “I don’t want to live in a world where we tell people who desperately need our help to bugger off, basically,” explained one focus group member. They are generally content with their own lives – they don’t want anything much to change.

Life has treated many Leavers less well. Some feel under pressure economically and believe the EU adds to that pressure: “We’re on the breadline and yet we send all this money to Europe.” The leave campaign’s £350m figure has particularly struck a chord. For Leavers, immigration is a threat, not an opportunity, and they think that everyone would be talking about it if it were not politically incorrect to do so. “It’s the first thing everyone thinks about whether they talk about it or not,” said one Knowsley man.

The EU referendum campaign may not have clarified all the issues in voters’ minds, but it has shone a light on a growing chasm in the country. People divided by geography, social class, age, education and income are even more sharply divided by outlook. Whether to remain in the EU or leave is just one of many of those differences. Whatever the outcome on Thursday, it is unlikely to heal our fractured nation.

