The return of Project Fear: how hope got sidelined in EU vote

2016-06-22

When it comes to voting day, what is the more potent weapon: hope or fear?

Judging by rival campaigns in Britain’s imminent EU referendum, there can only be one answer. Both sides routinely accuse the other of adopting “Project Fear” tactics. There is no shortage of evidence.

The remain camp kicked off with a sober warning from Sir Stuart Rose, the former M&S chairman, who set the tone: “I see the opposite argument as theoretical – we are looking into the unknown. It would be a leap of faith and a leap into the dark.”

The leave camp started out with a more upbeat message – the ambitions were loose, fanciful, but intoxicating: we could recreate the Britain of wave-ruling days by retaking our sovereignty. It didn’t last. And since then it has been fear v fear.

“Hope has been largely absent from both sides throughout this campaign,” said Marcus Roberts, former Labour strategist and now head of international policy at YouGov. “Fear is easier than hope. But hope is the more powerful weapon in campaigns. The problem is it’s also harder to do right – as this campaign has more than demonstrated.”

Instead, ever-more terrifying prospects have loomed over the four months of campaigning: from remain, that we would plunge the economy into recession, that this would necessitate yet more savage cuts, that it could be years before we resumed normal trade with anyone, that even peace itself could be under threat.

From the leaves, meanwhile, the threats were all centred on migrants: 88 million Turks who would immediately move here as soon as they joined the EU; the direct borders this would give us with Syria and Iraq, the number of migrants who were probably terrorists, the unending stream of foreigners, pushing us to “breaking point”. One poster of appalling opportunism threatened the likelihood of “Orlando-style attacks”, should we continue to accept refugees (which we don’t) as part of our EU membership (which it isn’t).

Iain Dale, the LBC broadcaster and long-term Conservative supporter and commentator, remarked in a dispirited tone: “The remain side have done Project Fear to a greater extent than the leaves, but that’s not to excuse what leave have done. In all my political life, this has been the most disgraceful campaign. It’s not enthused anybody. There’s been nothing positive to say about why Europe could be good for this country. It’s all just been slagging off the other side.”

The concentration on immigration was inevitable, according to Frank Field, one of the prominent Brexiters of the Labour party.

“Nobody is going to rush to the polls to vote on sovereignty,” he said. “But they do understand what it means in a day-to-day sense, control over borders. That’s why it was obvious from the word go that this was going to be the topic. It has to be on an issue which everybody can understand, and that issue had to be immigration. I’m just amazed it’s taken the exit campaign so long to realise that.”

But according to Marcus Roberts, the leave camp has not completely given in to the fear tactic. “They still do both. [The leave strapline] Take Back Control is a genius slogan because it simultaneously plays to your hopes and your fears.”

Remainers have been more negative by comparison. Their artillery has been mainly economic, and the heavier the guns got, the bleaker the landscape became. We would spend decades renegotiating trade deals; sterling would be in immediate free-fall; we would be pitched into crisis in the short term, recession in the medium term and in the long term be permanently poorer.

The fact that these predictions are well-founded and endorsed by sources as neutral as the Institute for Fiscal Studies and Barack Obama did little to mitigate the fact that they were overwhelmingly negative in outlook. The positives of EU membership never got a look-in.

The key question is for the remain side: how has it failed so consummately to attach any optimism to its message, anything good at all to be said for Europe, beyond “it’s not perfect, but it’s better than chaos”?

Neal Lawson, who runs Good Europe (disclosure: I was in their advisory group), said: “Even for people voting to remain, they’re doing it with buyer’s regret, because they feel dirty in the process. They’re worried about their house prices or job prospects or whatever. No one’s given them a positive, beautiful reason for what this project can do.”

It is partly David Cameron’s failure to make any plans for his switch from neutral steward of the vote to full-on protector of the union. Labour must also take some blame for the failure – crystallised by the speech in which the party’s leader, Jeremy Corbyn, stood up to fight for Europe, and ended up attacking the chancellor, George Osborne, instead.

And there are parallels from the Scotland referendum vote too. Robin McAlpine, founder of Common Weal, which campaigned for independence, said: “In Scotland the no campaign largely had its script written for it (safety and risk, patriotism and strength) – but the yes campaign didn’t. It was a blank sheet of paper and a pencil. Long before we got anywhere near the EU referendum, it was already a battle between a Daily Mail-framed Little England and a CBI-framed system of globalised trade deals.”

Prof Andrew Oswald, an academic who published some fascinating research on how having daughters makes you more leftwing than having sons, is principally a happiness researcher. “By and large, I think this has been a debate driven by rationality, even if it doesn’t always seem that way. Very high-skilled, well-off people are not fearful of Europeans; those with low skills are more fearful, and there’s an element of rationality to that.

“We know from research literature that background fear has a huge influence on people’s happiness and satisfaction with life. They’re not conscious of it, but the latest research shows that fear of unemployment, fear of ill-health, fear of crime, these are very significant, large influences on human happiness. It’s kind of consistent with common sense, but we see it coming through strongly.”

And the political landscape does indeed seem meaner and sadder. An MP has been murdered for the first time, apart from killings by the IRA and similar groups, since 1812. MPs are afraid for their lives. Newspapers who use xenophobia as their bread and butter are clutching their pearls in horror if anyone suggests that preaching race hate might create an act of race hate.

Fear might be easier to generate than hope, but it brings sadness with it.

