EU referendum morning briefing: campaigning suspended after death of Jo Cox

2016-06-17

Killing of Labour MP for Batley and Spen shines spotlight on security as police continue to investigate




The death of 

Friends, colleagues, constituents and those who knew little of Cox before Thursday’s devastating events attended vigils to show respect for an MP 

Here is what we now know:

I and Jo’s friends and family are going to work every moment of our lives to love and nurture our kids and to fight against the hate that killed Jo.

Jo believed in a better world and she fought for it every day of her life.

 The referendum is a great exercise in democracy. But the campaign has been suspended, on both sides, out of respect for Jo and her family – and for that democracy that she served.

One of the virtues of our parliamentary democracy is the everyday accessibility of MPs to the people they represent. It’s what makes the way we govern ourselves very different from many others. We believe in freedom, liberty and justice … Today’s horrible events are an assault on all of these values.

 Jo’s death reminds us that our democracy is precious but fragile – we must never forget to cherish it.

Inevitably, we want to know what was behind the killing, what it means and what it says about us, our political system, our language and its consequences. It’s easy in these circumstances to assume and inflame; harder to be thoughtful and careful.

 by 

When you shout BREAKING POINT over and over again, you don’t get to be surprised when someone breaks. When you present politics as a matter of life and death, as a question of national survival, don’t be surprised if someone takes you at your word. You didn’t make them do it, no, but you didn’t do much to stop it either.

Sometimes rhetoric has consequences. If you spend days, weeks, months, years telling people they are under threat, that their country has been stolen from them, that they have been betrayed and sold down the river, that their birthright has been pilfered, that their problem is they’re too slow to realise any of this is happening, that their problem is they’re not sufficiently mad as hell, then at some point, in some place, something or someone is going to snap. And then something terrible is going to happen.

 

Contempt for politics is dangerous and contagious, yet it has become a widespread default sneer. There was 

Democracy is precious and precarious. It relies on a degree of respect for the opinions of others, soliciting support for political ideas without stirring up undue savagery and hatred against opponents …

Something close to a chilling culture war is breaking out in Britain, a divide deeper than I have ever known, as I listen to the anger aroused by this referendum campaign. The air is corrosive, it has been rendered so. One can register shock at what has happened, but not complete surprise. 

Conservative MP 

At the time, her party leadership was against military intervention in Syria and mine was in favour, which meant the atmosphere around the issue was quite heated. But she was completely uninterested in any of that. She just wanted to do the right thing …

It’s hard to believe that someone so brave and fearless and fun is dead, but the hardest thing to think about is her two lovely little children. They would come in to Portcullis House for tea with their mum, and now she’s gone.

 has backed Britain remaining in the EU. In a letter to 

Labour’s 

 with a complaint that it incites racial hatred. The Unison union general secretary, 

