Train misery for commuters yet to vote in EU referendum

2016-06-23

Commuters in south-east England expressed their frustration as extensive rail disruption threatened to scupper their chances to vote in the EU referendum.

Thousands of people were stranded at Waterloo station as trains were delayed or cancelled after torrential rain caused a flood in the Wimbledon area, throwing services in and out of Waterloo into chaos.

Waterloo serves 90 million passengers a year, which is about 250,000 a day on average although this includes weekends and holidays. Cannon Street (closed because of signalling failures), Charing Cross, London Bridge and Victoria stations were also affected. They are all major commuter stations. Many people were likely to have left for work this morning before the EU referendum polls opened.

The Rail Delivery Group, which represents train operating companies, and Network Rail said among the train operators affected were Abellio Greater Anglia, Gatwick Express, Southern, South West Trains and Thameslink.

“Torrential rain and lightning damage have caused disruption to the railway across the south east of England today with delays and cancellations on many routes into London,” said RDG.

Network Rail said it had deployed 1,200 staff to deal with the severe weather, though that was no consolation for those unable to get home in good time. Passengers tweeted to express their exasperation at the likelihood of missing out on the most important vote in years.

The broadcaster and journalist Sian Williams tweeted:

At London Cannon St. No trains. Haven't voted. Ballot on kitchen table in Kent #EUref #flooding pic.twitter.com/aalup8IZjH

Michael Hill, formerly at the BBC and Channel 4, was stuck at Charing Cross:

Chaos and overcrowding at London stations. People at Charing Cross panicking about getting home to vote (including me!).

The Electoral Commission held out little hope for commuters who stood to miss the voting deadline.

In London/SE and want to vote in the #EURef? Make sure you plan now to get back to your local polling station by 10pm!

Disruption was not confined to the railways. More than 100 flights were cancelled as French air traffic controllers went on strike again. Passengers due to travel with British Airways, easyJet and Ryanair, were among those affected.

The strike disrupted the travel plans of thousands of football fans due to fly to France for Euro 2016. It is the 51st ATC strike in the country since 2009 and the 10th in the past three months.

BA said: “The French air traffic control trade unions are causing unnecessary frustration and disruption for customers. We once again urge the French government and the trade unions to resolve their issues so that customers can go on their holidays and business trips without these frequent threats of strike action hanging over them.”

