Immigrants’ view on the EU referendum: ‘When you hear people talk about migration they ignore the benefits’

2016-06-19

Moved from a small village in Tuscany two years ago to work in a pizza restaurant in Stroud, Gloucestershire

“I know the boss from before because his family comes from the same village in Lucca that I’m from,” says Livrini.

Although his friends and family in Italy do not discuss the vote in the UK, Livrini found that it was a popular topic of conversation on a recent visit to Hungary and France.

“A lot of people talked to me because they knew I worked in England and they asked me what was going on, what do you think about it, is it a problem for you because you are from Italy?” he says. “To be honest, I think it is better for England if they [the UK] go out of Europe. For me it is strange to say this because I am from Italy, but I’m always honest, I always say what I think.

“There are a lot of people coming from the east, which is OK, but if you don’t work you must go back to your country. Where I live in Italy is a small village, but the problem with immigration has started there as well. The Italian government could use the money for people from Italy. It’s the same here. The government in England pays money for these people when they could help people from England.”

“If I was in Italy and they had a vote to stay in Europe or to go out, for sure I would say to go out because of immigration. I’m not a racist. If people are coming here that’s fine, but they need to work.” DG

Orignally from Ostrava, Czech Republic. Moved to Banbury in Oxfordshire in 2009, and in 2013 set up her own company, Distinct Estate Agents

“Before I came here I had a pretty senior position in the Czech Republic but I always wanted to travel,” Naivertová explains. “I wanted to improve my English and then go to Italy but I just fell in love with England. I became a much more cosmopolitan and open-minded person.”

Naivertová was brought up under communism until the age of 13 and says that the Czech Republic is still “restricted to certain thinking”.

“When I came to Britain, my world view changed, how I perceive people. I developed a huge respect for every culture, race and nationality. What I really like about Britain is that you can pretty much do anything. Even if you’re 35 and want to do something completely different in your life, no one will look at you like you’re bonkers.”

She became a British citizen in 2013 and feels that life has become a bit harder here. “People work more and more and life has become more stressful. There’s more pressure on people.”

However, she feels the referendum is focusing the debate in the wrong direction. “I am an immigrant to this country but I do believe immigration should be controlled,” she says. “If I was living in the Czech Republic or China I would still think immigration should be controlled. That’s my very strong belief. But the politicians are focusing on immigration in a very negative way. They should be focusing on the issues about in and out, the advantages and disadvantages.”

She says she doesn’t think people treat her differently for being a migrant, but that may be because she lives “in a very good part of England which is very cosmopolitan”.

“I adopted this country as my own, and if you go somewhere as an expat it’s up to you to make an effort and make something out of this country,” she says. “I was spat at 12 years ago when I came here, but recently I’ve never had problems. The funniest thing is I went to Wales once and they said to me ‘You’re a very nice person, why are you living in England?’”JT

From Amritsar in north-west India. Went to the London School of Economics to study an MBA, then moved to Newcastle where he works as the manager of a betting shop

“In the industry I work in, I deal with people from all backgrounds,” says Malhotra. “I think people are worried when they see a lot of immigrants coming to the UK. They relate immigration to everyday problems, like delays in getting doctor’s appointments and lack of housing. They don’t mention it directly to me, but when you have a discussion they aren’t happy with the amount of people coming to the UK. Immigration is the main reason I’ve heard for those wanting to leave the EU.”

Malhotra says he encountered racial abuse a couple of times in London, which he used to find frustrating and upsetting. “Now I don’t notice it so much,” he says. “If one person says you don’t belong here, I don’t think it’s a battle worth having. I ignore them and move on. Most people are friendly and have accepted me.”

He says he now sees more people in the UK from abroad, but doesn’t view this as a negative thing.

“Greater diversity brings much more talent and skills – this is a huge benefit to the country and the economy. When people talk about immigration, they don’t talk about this – the doctors, engineers, scientists, hard-working people running their businesses, or even people working in shops.

“The focus is the strain on the NHS, more people claiming benefits rather than people working, paying their taxes and helping to grow the economy.”

Malhotra voted via postal vote last week . “I voted to remain in the EU. If we leave, we’ll be competing with countries like India, China and America in terms of trade. Risks like rising inflation, trade deficit, weaker currency, higher interest rates etc can have greater impact on the UK.

“There would be short-term benefits of leaving the EU, but the benefits of remaining are far greater.” JT

From Skopje in the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia, and is also ethnically Romany. He moved to London in 2005 and works as a university lecturer

“Arriving in London I had a cultural shock – I was shocked by the freedom of, let’s say, the homosexuals to show who they really are,” says Demirovski. “I was positively impressed by the ability of people to express their complex identity.”

Although Demirovski has indefinite leave to remain, he is not yet a British citizen and so cannot vote in the EU referendum.

“But if I did have a vote, I’d vote Remain,” he says. “We had all these arguments about free trade and growth, but on a human level I think integration is important. We should have a place where we can keep our diversities and differences but learn to live with each other.”

He believes immigration has hijacked the debate around whether to leave the EU or not.

“The idea is first come, first served,” he says. “That the ones arriving early in a country have more rights than later migrants. If you look at Nigel Farage, his family came in the 19th century but he believes he now has more rights than the ones who arrived 50 years ago, or 10 years ago, or today. That’s wrong.”

Demirovski says his experience over the last 11 years is that people’s sentiment about migration has changed.

“You go on the trains and buses and people start chatting to you about the referendum and the debate on immigration and ask details. People are curious to find out more. That’s the positive element. But the referendum and the whole issue about immigration is like Pandora’s box – all-giving but contains all the evils of the world. I’m afraid in British society that we are yet to face all the evils.” JT

Two women from eastern Europe , who have made Glasgow their home. They share similar views of the warmth of Scotland’s welcome, but see the referendum differently

Merelin Melesk from Estonia is enjoying a second stay in Glasgow, having lived here five years ago before travelling through Europe and Australia. She works as an assistant in a coffee shop and volunteers for the RSPB, which she hopes will help in her studies in environmental management.

Katarzyna Jaroch-Wychorska, from Poland, has lived in Glasgow for 10 years and is a support worker. They were helped to settle and find work in Scotland through the Bridges Programmes, a charity which helps immigrants, refugees and asylum-seekers integrate and find work in the country.

They both talk of their love for Glasgow. “I love this city,” says Jaroch-Wychorska. “It’s been a great experience for me and I am so grateful how much help I’ve had to settle from the government.”

Melesk agrees. “Scottish people are so friendly and have always been warm and helpful. Even when I have travelled in other countries like Italy or Australia, I have always met Scottish people and they are always the friendliest.”

Yet, while Jaroch-Wychorska is fearful about the outcome of the EU referendum, Melesk is a little more relaxed. Jaroch-Wychorska is unsure of what her status will be if Britain votes to leave the European Union. “At the moment, we are European citizens, but how would we be regarded if Britain leaves Europe,” she asks.

Melesk, though, is unfazed. “Look,” she says, “I am not fleeing persecution in Estonia, nor did I come to Scotland for financial reasons. I felt that what Scotland offered would help me to achieve my aim of having a career in environmental management.

“If Britain votes to leave the European Union, then so be it. And if I must return to Estonia, then that’s OK.” KM

Nakamura is from Nara in Japan. She left at the age of 16 to go to the Leipzig Opera Ballet, then came to the UK in 2011. She lives in Ashford with her boyfriend, Fourmi, another dancer with the Jasmin Vardimon Company. He is from Le Mans in France

Nakamura thinks the attitude towards immigrants is more problematic in Ashford than in London, where she lived previously. “London was particularly open to immigrants or anyone from other cultures, but we have experienced some mean attitudes towards immigrants [in Ashford]. Small things, but sometimes I think, is it is because I am an immigrant that you are doing this?” she says.

She believes life will get harder for migrants in the UK, whichever way the vote goes later this week. She pays £600 a year for a visa to remain in the UK and £150 a year to access the NHS. “When I pay for my visa, I almost have nothing left that month. I’m sure it will get more strict.”

Fourmi feels that much of the debate during the referendum has been about immigration. “It is the same in France. Constantly you talk about immigration. People are scared and I understand that, but I think they shouldn’t be,” he says.

He says he recently found himself at the receiving end of some vitriol about his nationality. “I was renting a car and somehow I might have jumped the queue, which I didn’t realise. And then the guy recognised my accent and said ‘Oh, you’re fucking French’ and went on [about it], being really aggressive. It was really shocking.”

He feels that much of the time when people talk about immigrants “taking jobs” there is more to it than that.

“What I hear behind that is more like racism,” he says. “And I think political people are fuelling this to attract some of the people [to vote to leave the EU].” JT

