Ruth Davidson was the star at Wembley. Can’t we have more politicians like her?

2016-06-22

The Scottish Tory leader, Ruth Davidson, was the star striker of the EU referendum semi-final at Wembley Arena last night. Highlights included her demolition of Boris Johnson’s “lying” about the cost by quoting his “there might or might not” be job losses if Britain votes for leave, and followed it up by telling voters to massive applause: “You deserve the truth.”

It is no surprise to anyone who has watched Davidson since the Scottish referendum that she is an impressive politician. Unlike so many of those we’re disdainful of in Westminster, she gives every impression of being a normal, rounded human being.

During the 2015 general election campaign she posed for photographs on a tank à la Margaret Thatcher with a union flag, re-enacted Alex Salmond’s cringeworthy Solero photoshoot, and generally took the mickey out of herself. She’s also the only politician ever photographed with a pint of beer who looks comfortable with it.

Davidson’s a far cry from the Bullingdon Club posh boys who’ve done so much to turn people off the Conservative party. She’s a gay kickboxer from Selkirk, a former local journalist and Sunday school teacher whose dad was a mill manager.

Davidson was inspired to join politics not by a lust for power or an accident of birth but when, in the wake of the 2009 expenses scandal, David Cameron called for people who had never been political before to get more involved.

Her Twitter feed is not just a set of party political broadcasts. She deals sarcastically with trolls, retweets funny gifs and uses slang without it sounding forced. In short, she does everything that most ordinary people do, and along with the other two women leading Scotland’s major parties, makes most of the politicians we have south of the border look slightly dim and fairly incompetent.

Davidson, along with the SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon and Labour’s Kezia Dugdale are all politicians of such capability that it seems unfair Scotland has been able to conjure them out of a population of 5.3 million while the best England and Wales can come up with out of 56 million is an Eton schoolboy and a dropout from North London Poly. Perhaps it’s the accent; maybe it’s the elfin grin. Or maybe Scotland is just better at elevating people worth elevating rather than turning its back on politics, and letting whoever rise to the surface.

Political life has to include ruthless game-playing, strategies that make your eyes water and the sort of decisions that none of us would fancy making. You have to be able to choose whether to close a library or build a roundabout, fund new knees at the expense of fixing kidneys, campaign alongside Cameron or snub him. And the more disengaged people become from politics, the more likely it is that the person making those choices is someone who doesn’t think it’s difficult – who quite genuinely finds changing other people’s lives for better or worse the kind of thing that doesn’t keep them awake at night.

Nobody’s perfect, but personally I’d far rather the sort of person working on that sort of thing were one who comes across like a normal human being. It’s easier to forgive them when they get it wrong and easier to trust them to make the right decision nine times out of 10.

And it’s a beautiful Catch-22, if you like, that the more normal and unpolitician-like a politician is, the more they engage us in the issues that they wrestle with, and thus the more they seem one of us.

Davidson has the best of Boris Johnson – an ability to appeal to voters across the board – without his waffle or sense of entitlement. She’s able to go toe-to-toe with Sturgeon and has overseen a resurgence in Tory fortunes north of the border. She’d probably petrify Nigel Farage, which would be a good thing to see.

It’s just a shame that we can’t stage a cross-border raid and grab her, Sturgeon and Dugdale for our own.

