EU referendum morning briefing: from the Thames to the Tories – it's war

2016-06-16

Farage’s flotilla farrago makes way for claims of ‘ludicrous scaremongering’ as pro-leave Conservatives sign up to condemn George Osborne’s Brexit budget




How to describe Wednesday, a day when 

Before it was over, Farage’s flotilla of angry trawlermen campaigning for leave had drenched Geldof’s boat with hoses and angrily boarded it midstream to the dismay of the river authorities. Geldof’s boat almost shredded the eardrums of those on Farage’s vessel with a high decibel blast of 60s pop music; Geldof called Farage “a fraud” and flicked him the V sign.

The flotilla farrago also had the side-effect of sinking 

 this morning, former party leaders 

A separate letter signed by 65 MPs, including six former cabinet ministers – Duncan Smith again,

If the chancellor is serious, then we cannot possibly allow this to go ahead. It would be unnecessary, wrong and a rejection of the platform on which we all stood. If he were to proceed with these proposals, the chancellor’s position would become untenable.

Lead Brexiteer 

There is no need for an emergency budget. The truth is, if we vote to leave we will be in an economically stronger position.

(For more on Gove on BBCQT, see the 

Some Tories remain with remain, however, and today the home secretary 

We are just as concerned as men about our economy, defence capability and the influence we wield as a nation on the global stage.

Much of the action today leaves London behind – I know! It does happen sometimes – and heads north, where 

Brown, alongside shadow chancellor 

European money is necessary for renovation, renewal and regeneration – and right across the north, Scotland and Wales it is still vitally needed now.

And Kinnock will resurrect 

I warn you not to be on low or middle incomes as the disruption brought by 

A fresh 

It also found that 22% of voters felt “well” or “very well” informed about the referendum. Would it cheer you up if I told you that’s a rise of six percentage points since the same question was polled in February?

The chief executive of the Electoral Reform Society, 

These findings are deeply concerning, and show there is a real risk of a low turnout and a demographic divide when voters go to the ballot box …

A poor turnout alongside a close result poses the risk that people will view the decision as inconclusive, and we could see calls for further referendums or questioning of the validity of the result from either side. The last thing anyone wants to see is a contested and challenged outcome.

New poll idea: how many more months of this would you tolerate?

How did the referendum campaign go so wrong for Labour, asks 

 Inside Labour, the blame is already being liberally distributed. Some identify Corbyn as the chief culprit. Recent polling showed that nearly half of the party’s voters were uncertain of its position on the EU. This, MPs suggest, owes much to the Labour leader’s limited enthusiasm for the cause … Yet there is no truth in the claim that the lifelong Eurosceptic is a secret Brexiter. “I’ve had private conversations with him. He is convinced that voting Remain is the right thing to do,” a shadow cabinet minister told me …

But Corbyn is not the only senior figure blamed for the drift towards Brexit. 

 

We don’t realise the fragility of our liberal societies and the need to protect them. The European project has been a conscious effort to spread its core values, from democracy to human rights. It has worked; central European and Baltic states could only join once they had adopted them. Walking away from 

The cavalier foolishness with which Leavers think they can rip Britain out of Europe and yet trust that everything else they value — trade, intelligence sharing, stability, goodwill — will stay the same amazes me. Privately the Europeans, led by Germany, are explicit that if we go Europe will close ranks against us. They must. They cannot afford to prioritise selling us BMWs above the survival of the union. They have to make clear to other nationalist parties tempted to follow the UK that there will be no preferential treatment, only harsh consequences. If we reject our neighbours, they will have to reject us.

Proving that Brexit knows no boundaries (ironic, I know), here’s the 

The Spectator has a poll on whether we can trust polls and it’s hard to know what to think of that.

A joyous Twitter thread, this, from Peep Show star 

Appreciate this but completely wrong. Mark: Remain because it's the cautious thing to do. Mark's Dad: Leave. Jez... 

...Jez is Leave (we need to shake shit up) Super Hans: Remain (someone should cure cancer, let's get serious)... 

Intriguing. Vote Leave has been condemned for its “We send the EU £350m a week – let’s fund our NHS instead” slogan (

We've bowed to popular demand and repainted our 

It would be 

Would you like to wake up to this briefing in your inbox every weekday? Sign up 

