Comparing David Cameron to Neville Chamberlain is insulting – and wrong

2016-06-20

More than 75 years on, there is still no more insulting parallel to be volleyed at a Conservative politician than to be compared with the 1930s prime minister Neville Chamberlain. Being a quintessentially Conservative politician, David Cameron was duly outraged when a member of the studio audience fired the C-word at him on last night’s Question Time. It triggered a rare bit, in public at least, of authentic Cameronian anger and passion. But the question, with three days to go in the EU referendum campaign, is whether it’s the insult or the response that will resonate more with a public that seems to have had it up to here with the Brexit debate.

In Labour circles, there was for decades no worse insult than to be accused of being a Ramsay MacDonald, the leader who went into alliance with the Tories at the height of the depression in 1931 and went down in Labour history as the great betrayer as a result. Today, in some parts of the party, MacDonald’s place has perhaps been taken by Tony Blair. But in the Tory party, Chamberlain’s position as the party’s most despised former leader remains secure.

Few Tories these days have a good word to say about Edward Heath, largely because he took the UK into the EU and inflicted the longest political sulk of modern times on the Tory party after they ditched him in 1975. But Heath still has his admirers. Chamberlain by contrast has none. One of Heath’s most interesting contemporaries (and political rivals) Iain Macleod attempted to write a revisionist Chamberlain biography in the 1950s, but it fell on stony ground, and so bad does Chamberlain’s reputation remain, attempts since have had little more success. Which is why it got through Cameron’s normally imperturbable exterior last night.

To be compared with Chamberlain is a poisonous insult because of one policy and one policy only. Chamberlain, like his more attractive predecessor Stanley Baldwin, was an appeaser. He wanted to avoid a second European war so soon after the devastating carnage and upheaval caused by the first, in which so many of his contemporaries had died or lost loved ones. That was a widely shared view in the 1930s, an era in which pacifism, for obvious reasons, reached new levels of popularity. But it became an increasingly impossible policy once Adolf Hitler took power in Germany and began a series of territorial demands in central Europe.

In autumn 1938, Chamberlain went to Munich and accepted Hitler’s demands over the Sudetenland area of Czechoslovakia (a country that, like several in Europe, had only come into existence in 1919 after the collapse of the Austro-Hungarian empire). He returned to Croydon airport from Munich waving the piece of paper to which Cameron’s accuser referred last night – an image that has gone down in history as a sign of surrender and capitulation to brute force and dictatorship. It is less often remembered that Chamberlain then returned to central London where cheering – not jeering – crowds awaited him in Downing Street (not gated off in those days) and, even more strikingly, outside Buckingham Palace, where the prime minister appeared with King George VI to welcome Chamberlain’s hapless promise of “peace in out time”.

In the end, the only question, whether in 1938 or 2016 is what is the right policy for Britain in the circumstances

To compare Cameron’s attempt to win public support for Britain remaining in the EU with Chamberlain’s return from Munich is not only insulting – because the Tory party now sees itself as the party of Chamberlain’s great critic and successor Winston Churchill – but also wrong. The EU is neither a dictatorship, nor an armed power bent on war and annexation. It is, as Cameron said in his retort to his studio accuser, a union that a nation can voluntarily join and voluntarily leave. The comparison only makes sense if you believe that Germany is always an enemy – as a motley alliance of Tory rightwingers, the Daily Express, hardcore England football hooligans, permanently traumatised refugees from Nazism and a smattering of war veterans may indeed believe. But Angela Merkel is not Hitler and the EU is an institution of peace not war.

Nor does the charge that Churchill would have denounced UK membership of the EU in the same way that he denounced appeasement stack up. Churchill always thought of Britain as European. He was hugely engaged with European politics. He wanted Britain to be part of Europe, not separate from it. In 1940 he proposed the permanent union of Britain and France. He saw no contradiction between UK involvement in Europe and other roles in alliance with the USA or within the Anglosphere. Churchill took the lessons of war and peace seriously. Nor was he an English chauvinist. The clear consensus of historians and the evidence is that Churchill would have been far more likely, were he still alive, to want Britain playing a role within the EU than turning its back on the EU. Cameron was right to claim Churchill for remain.

In the end, the only question, whether in 1938, 1940 or 2016 is what is the right policy for Britain in the circumstances. A referendum is a very uncontrollable judge of that big question. Unpopular though Chamberlain always was on the left of British politics, despised as he became as war drew nearer after Munich, never mind his unmentionable role in retrospect, it is a sobering thought that if appeasement had been put to a referendum vote after Munich in 1938, it might well have been overwhelmingly supported.

