The leavers have taken control. No wonder things are unravelling

2016-06-24

Wanting your country back turns out to have been a zero-sum game. Waking up this morning, about 52% of voters felt they’d got it back, and about 48% felt they’d lost it. Yet perhaps in the long reckoning both sides will find they had, in the unspeakably tragic phrase of the hour, more in common than that which divides us. Maybe it’ll be like Clint Eastwood says at the end of The Outlaw Josey Wales, as he stares that thousand-yard stare: “I guess we all died a little in that damn war.”

For now, the victory belongs to Boris Johnson and Michael Gove, and to Nigel Farage. This is their triumph. Either celebrate it, or attempt not to choke on it. They have “taken back control”. They have “got their country back”.

What else did we get back? Definitely our financial arse, which was being handed to us way before the FTSE-100 even opened. David Cameron’s much-remarked-upon political luck has finally run out, and a campaign whose guiding spirit was a mendacious short-termism has produced the ultimate long-term result.

Whichever way you slice it, this feels like a significant moment for trust in politics. Before the result was even formally declared, Farage had rubbished the idea of the extra £350m for the NHS as a “mistake”, while the MEP Dan Hannan had talked down the idea of a reduction in immigration. What a magical mystery tour it will be for people, then, to discover what it was in fact they were actually voting for. And who will be blamed for things now the EU bogeyman is slain? The history of the continent offers a series of chilling answers to that inquiry.

Doubtless a coherent plan of action will emerge. For now, Farage has one idea for the credit column: “June 23 needs to become a national holiday,” he declared. And we will call it INDEPENDENCE DAY!” (Come, friendly aliens … )

To watch him bluster about a win against “big politics” and “getting on with the job” was to be struck by an old conviction: there is little so dangerous in politics as people who regard complex things as being incredibly simple.

As for Johnson and Gove, who have spent the best part of eight weeks joyfully telling whoppers and making mind-boggling Nazi comparisons, they deployed their extra-special slow and quiet voices to address the nation. Gove in particular came off like an am-dram quaverer seconds from segueing into John Hannah’s “Stop all the clocks” reading from Four Weddings and a Funeral.

As for Boris, never forget that the only untruth the prime ministerial favourite-in-waiting corrected in the entire campaign was the Sunday Times’ misapprehension that he dyes his hair.

“This does not mean that the United Kingdom will be any less united,” he intoned this morning, suggesting he must have been watching the day’s events on tape delay. Before breakfast the SNP had declared it sees Scotland’s future as part of the EU, while Sinn Féin called for a referendum on Irish unity. Boris was proud we were the fifth largest economy, he went on, apparently unaware that Events had already bumped us down to number six.

For those who had voted to remain … well, a new dawn had shat, had it not? Four hours before the official leave campaign mounted their podium, Nigel Farage arrived triumphantly in front of the Houses of Parliament, to which he has failed to get elected seven times, and which may ultimately only be visible protruding from the sand to be stumbled upon by a latterday Charlton Heston. (Ask your grandparents, millennials. Because really, even by their own exacting standards, this result was the baby boomers’ finest hour.)

What would the Ukip leader say? Cometh the hour, what man would come? When Margaret Thatcher arrived in Downing Street in 1979, she famously addressed “all the British people – howsoever they voted”, with the attributed words of St Francis of Assisi: “Where there is discord, may we bring harmony. Where there is error, may we bring truth. Where there is doubt, may we bring faith. And where there is despair, may we bring hope.”

Finally required to find his own words for the moment towards which he had been building all his political life, statesminnow Farage dismissed half the country as indecent, ruling: “This is a victory for ordinary people, for decent people.” Where there was harmony, let him bring discord. “Mass immigration is the issue that ultimately won this election.” Where there was faith, let him bring doubt. “And we did it all without a single bullet being fired.” Where there was hope, let him bring despair.

Yes, this is his victory. Fascinatingly, he seemed psychologically incapable of accepting it. I must confess to always having suspected that a man of Farage’s Partridgean stature would become overwhelmed in his hour of personal destiny, and was struck by his decision to pull out of the final referendum TV debate merely an hour before he was due to appear. Vote night itself saw him concede early, only to unconcede, then reconcede, then re-unconcede.

What insecurities tug beneath the surface of the leader of the United Kingdom Independence party? Or rather, the leader of the Kingdom Independence party, given the various schisms opening up seemingly by the hour. As for what sort of country Farage believes himself to have taken back control of, there were heavy clues, not just in that infamous poster but in the film he narrated at his final rally on Wednesday morning.

A work of suitably nostalgic, sub-Pearl & Dean production values, this depicted a place of Spitfires and the battle of Britain and the Queen’s coronation. Most jarring (for this viewer at least) was a section in which Farage explained that Britain was “a country of sporting greatness”. Bizarrely, this was illustrated only with footage of Ian Botham from the 1981 Ashes series.

Why? You’d think there’d have been something slightly more au courant – the London Olympics were pretty epic, for instance. What precisely is it about so much of the British sporting success that has followed Botham’s Ashes, a full 35 years ago, that makes it unsuitable for a Ukip rally film? Perhaps we’ll put our collective finger on it as he becomes more emboldened by this stunning victory.

Each of us can speak only as we find. For my own part – with a political wishlist that has always included progressivism, tolerance, universal human rights, openness, truthfulness and an outward-looking national state of mind – I can’t help feeling 2016’s wave of departures finally makes sense. All those cool people died just in time.

