EU referendum as it happened: Juncker calls for start to Brexit negotiations

2016-06-25

We’re closing the live blog for tonight. Here’s a summary of the main points.

•The prime minister David Cameron announced he would step down after failing to convince the country to vote to stay in the European Union in Thursday’s referendum.

•The fallout started immediately: the pound collapsed, prompting recession fears, and by the end of the day Brexit panic had wiped $2tn off the world economy.

•European leaders reacted to the vote by insisting that Britain start negotiations to leave immediately. The UK has also been told that its access to the internal EU market would be restricted – the “price”, it was said, for leaving.

•Political figures on both sides of the debate, however, insisted there was no need to rush through the process.

•The US tried to soothe British concerns about the status of the special relationship but President Obama reiterated his warning that the UK will go to the “back of the queue” for trade deal negotiations.

•Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader, faced a challenge to his leadership as a group of his MPs tabled a motion of no confidence in it.

President Barack Obama stands by his comment that Britain will move to the back of the queue when it comes to trade deals with the United States after Brexit, the White House said on Friday.

“Obviously, the president stands by what he said and I don’t have an update of our position,” White House spokesman Eric Schultz said.

Saturday’s front pages are out and, unsurprisingly, the papers are all leading on Brexit. Equally unsurprisingly, they’re heavily polarised.

GUARDIAN:.Over. And out #tomorrowspaperstoday #bbcpapers pic.twitter.com/0p5B1gawDh

TELEGRAPH: Birth of a new Britain #tomorrowspaperstoday #bbcpapers pic.twitter.com/FHi5zgxEBX

THE TIMES: Brexit earthquake #tomorrowspaperstoday #bbcpapers pic.twitter.com/fnO0JT9Zf7

SUN EXCLUSIVE: Why should I do the hard s**t? #tomorrowspaperstoday #bbcpapers pic.twitter.com/HW4vmOjGoU

DAILY MIRROR: So what the hell happens now? #tomorrowspaperstoday #bbcpapers pic.twitter.com/8IyZTEGX73

DAILY EXPRESS: We're out of the EU #tomorrowspaperstoday #bbcpapers pic.twitter.com/uo1QEPtckm

INDEPENDENT DIGITAL: Welcome to Boris Island #tomorrowspaperstoday #bbcpapers pic.twitter.com/rHK9xJWTPG

THE I: Caught Out #tomorrowspaperstoday #bbcpapers pic.twitter.com/kFufUVIcYV

THE NATIONAL: Indyref 2 - We're ready #tomorrowspaperstoday #bbcpapers pic.twitter.com/wWdF8NhcUt

And there’s even polarisation within the Daily Mail’s offices.

DAILY MAIL HISTORIC EDITION: Take a bow, Britain! #tomorrowspaperstoday #bbcpapers pic.twitter.com/VpurBk5KXo

SCOTTISH DAILY MAIL: Disunited Kingdom #tomorrowspaperstoday #bbcpapers pic.twitter.com/ZVm2nyxdyh

Meanwhile, Reuters reports that major Wall Street banks are scouring Europe to find a new home for their traders, bankers and financial licences.

“The question becomes, where exactly do they move to? There’s no clear answer on that. You might end up having a more fragmented financial industry in Europe,” Edward Chan, a partner at law firm Linklaters, told the news agency.

British financial institutions will have more limited access to the EU’s internal market once it leaves the bloc, the chair of the council of eurozone finance ministers says.

Jeroen Dijsselbloem told RTL television that some institutions would leave the City and that limited access was the price of Brexit.

A few years ago, London took out adverts in the Asian edition of the Financial Times saying it was the place to come if you wanted to do business in the EU. Now they can’t place that advert, and the Asians will go to Amsterdam or Frankfurt instead.

The UK’s longterm debt outlook was cut to ‘negative’ from ‘stable’ by the ratings agency Moody’s, which said the Brexit vote would hit the country’s medium-term growth outlook.

It maintained the EU’s outlook at ‘stable’.

Moody’s also affirmed European Union’s AAA rating and the United Kingdom’s Aa1 rating on Friday, Reuters reported.

There are reports of anti-Brexit protests in Glasgow, Edinburgh and London.

Hundreds gathered in Scotland to show their support for migrants and protest against what they describe as a “torrent of racism” unleashed during the referendum campaign.

In London, one group went to London Bridge – the site of the offices of Rupert Murdoch’s News UK, the parent company of the Sun and Times newspapers. The two papers took opposing stances on the referendum; the former backing Brexit and the latter Remain.

Meanwhile at London Bridge pic.twitter.com/QDin4VoMXQ

About 30 were also reported to have demonstrated outside the gates of Downing Street, saying they had been “robbed” of their futures and chanting: “No borders! No Boris!”

The secretary general of the Muslim Council of Britain, Dr Shuja Shafi, has called for Britain’s political leaders to unite the country after a campaign that has targeted immigrants.

Clearly, this referendum has shown that there is disenchantment not only with the European Union but also with the way politics is carried out in our country.

Our political leaders must now address these concerns in an inclusive and conciliatory way. We have witnessed a campaign that has been divisive and at times has led to the scapegoating of immigrants and minority groups.

It is vitally important now that those in power must come together and heal divisions. We must also work hard to change the tone of our politics, to continue to be welcoming to those who are in need and to be an outward looking country.

And while our country has voted to officially leave the European Union, we hope we can nevertheless retain bonds of friendship and peace with the rest of the continent.

Reacting to the resignation of David Cameron, Dr Shuja Shafi said:

We thank the prime minister for his public service. While the government’s relationship with Muslim communities has been extremely challenging, we commend David Cameron for speaking out against Islamophobia. We hope his successor takes greater strides in working with Muslim communities and in resisting the temptation of xenophobia and intolerance that this result could possibly bring.

The Muslim Council of Britain did not take a position during the referendum campaign, but did urge British Muslims to exercise their vote.

The UK should be denied access to the single market if it does not comply with EU environmental laws in areas such as chemicals and food safety, the vice-chair of the European parliament’s environment committee tells the Guardian.

Benedek Jávor, a Green MEP, said: “If food safety standards or chemical standards are weakened in the UK, it raises the issue of the compatibility of British products with the EU market.

“I believe that if the UK is to stay in the single market, we have to ensure that its products fulfil all of the EU’s environmental and food safety standards.”

Beyond questions of market access, the UK is likely to soon be cut free from EU laws such as the birds and habitats directive, which anchors the world’s largest coordinated network of protected nature reserves.

These spread across 18% of European territory – and 8% of Britain – providing havens to threatened wildlife and sites of natural beauty.

More exits from the EU are inevitable if the bloc maintains its current course, Turkey’s president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has said, according to Reuters.

The French newspaper Libération has released its weekend edition front page.

A slightly mocking headline, with a subheading that reads: “Shock in the UK and plenty of questions among other EU nations after the Boris Johnson-backed Brexit win.”

A la une de @libe ce week-end : «Good luck»https://t.co/BPDFO3GN03 pic.twitter.com/fDEMEFfPZK

