Marine Le Pen: do not speculate about Jo Cox's killing

2016-06-17

Marine Le Pen, leader of France’s far-right Front National, has cautioned against speculation that the British MP Jo Cox was killed because of her pro-EU and immigrant-friendly stance.

Le Pen said it was “not very decent to use this dramatic event” for speculation.

Two early lines of inquiry by the police investigating Cox’s murder in West Yorkshire are understood to be the 52-year-old suspect’s links to far-right groups and his mental health.

Le Pen spoke at a meeting in Vienna of rightwing and Eurosceptic parties convened under the motto “patriotic spring”.

She spoke alongside Heinz-Christian Strache, leader of the far-right Austrian Freedom party (FPÖ) whose candidate Norbert Hofer narrowly lost the presidential election last month. Strache said his party was “against all extremism”.

In a speech at the meeting, Le Pen said support for Brexit in the UK was one sign of a “new air” of patriotism sweeping Europe in what she called a “springtime of the people”.

She argued that alongside Hofer’s large score in the Austrian presidential election and the FN’s rise in France, “the movement for independence shown by support for Brexit across the Channel” was part of “a new wind blowing across our continent” – a kind of “hope” and “renaissance for the people”.

She said people across Europe had been “stuck for too long in a fatalism imposed by their disconnected or cynical elite” and the EU created “confusion, disorder and conflict” on all topics and caused “chaos and destruction everywhere”.”.

She added: “To keep their citizens submissive, discredited elites play on fears that are more and more exaggerated … They promise the British the worst catastrophes imaginable if they leave the EU – even the air quality is supposed to depend on it.”

Le Pen has seized on the UK’s referendum to boost her own critical stance on the European Union. Her anti-immigration and anti-euro party has said it would seek to renegotiate the terms of France’s EU membership if it took power and hold a referendum on whether France should stay in the EU.

Le Pen deliberately did not come to the UK to campaign for Brexit, despite considering an invitation to appear alongside Janice Atkinson, a former Ukip member of the European parliament who defected to join Le Pen’s far-right alliance.

Le Pen is running again for the French presidency next year and polls suggest she could make a strong showing.

When asked about Cox’s murder, Nicolas Bay, the Front National’s general secretary, told French TV: “It’s clearly hard to have an explanation. It’s a dramatic event and our thoughts are first with her family and children. For the rest, I think it’s the investigation that will tell us things and above all it’s important to hold back from any use of it for political purposes.”







