Daily Mail publishes correction to story about 'migrants from Europe'

2016-06-17

Newspaper says group arriving in back of lorry were actually from Iraq and Kuwait, contrary to claims in front-page article




The 

The newspaper ran the article, by its reporters James Slack and Jason Groves, on Thursday with the headline: “As politicians squabble over border controls, yet another lorry load of migrants arriving in the UK declaring ... We’re from 

However, in the correction published at the bottom of page two on Friday, the Mail said the group were from the Middle East. 

“In common with other newspapers, we published a reputable news agency’s story which said that stowaways intercepted in east London had told police that they were ‘from Europe’,” it said.

“In fact, while they had travelled to the UK in an Italian vehicle from mainland Europe, the migrants told police they were from Iraq and Kuwait.”

The Sun also 

The Daily Mail was on Friday criticised by the Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants, an independent national charity which exists to campaign for justice in immigration, nationality, and refugee law and policy. Saira Grant, the charity’s chief executive, told the Guardian: “It is absolutely vital that the media report accurately, without scare-mongering or demonising certain groups. 

“Inaccurate stories like this lead to a toxic public debate which very much affects how we treat refugees and migrants who are often in fear for their lives and futures. We are pleased this has been corrected, but we cannot continue to set our nation’s policy in a context of half-truths and headline grabbing distortions of reality.’

The correction comes as commentators continue to call out EU referendum campaign rhetoric that is seen to be misleading or divisive.

On Thursday, an 

Official campaigning remains suspended after the 

In May, 

That correction followed a series of complaints lodged with the Independent Press Standards Organisation by InFacts, a group campaigning for Britain to remain in the European Union, 

On Friday, Ipso said it had not yet received any complaints about the Daily Mail headline or article.

