'We'd rather talk about bananas than borders': our European neighbours on the EU

2016-06-22

As part of our EU Voices series, we have been asking people from across Europe to tell us their perceptions of the union

 

 and 




Tomorrow the fate of the UK and its role (or lack thereof) in the EU will be sealed. But what do our European neighbours think of the institution that we’re considering leaving? 

We asked people from the other 27 member states what the EU means in their country and what reforms, if any, they would like to see. Here is what they said. 

Views on the EU differ widely in Germany, from people dismissing it as a hugely expensive, undemocratic monster to others dubbing it the ultimate peace project. There is a lot of scepticism around the fact we traded the Deutschmark for the euro (seen by many as us surrendering our sovereignty) and the Greek financial crisis added fears of having too close a link to weaker economies. What’s more, the response from other member states to incoming refugees was seen as proof that – in times of crisis – selfishness rules within the EU. However, the other view that persists is that despite its problems and shortcomings the EU is an important stabilising factor in troubled times. Despite the fact populists are saying that our homeland should come first, for the time being there is no strong “leave” movement here.

The public view of the EU in Germany is generally positive. Even though the far-right political movements 

In Sweden there are twice as many people who are pro-EU as there are against it. Overall the EU has been great for Swedish exports, and for students who wish to study abroad. It’s made it easier for people who want international careers.

In 2004, during the debate over whether Malta should join the EU, the majority of people felt that we would be left behind if we didn’t. We felt that entering the EU would connect us more to 

The younger generation are enthusiastic about the EU. They realise that it has benefited a lot of people since its inception – promoting peace and strengthening our human rights. It’s also worth mentioning the EU’s open borders policy, as that impacts on most people’s daily lives. Moreover, we appreciate the EU’s commitment to empowering young people by offering education programmes and training. 

I’m from the Philippines and have lived in Austria for about a decade

People used to be very Eurosceptic in Poland, but it took only a few years of being part of the EU to convince them that it was the right decision. The EU allows us to be part of a large democratic movement. It has benefited me personally, letting me move to the UK and Ireland to study and develop my career. It’s also allowed me to see that western Europe is not some kind of utopia and that each country has its problems. 

I know that most British people want to stay in the EU and I would be very sad if the UK were to leave. It would feel like Britain was saying to the rest of Europe: “We don’t need you any more and we don’t care what happens to you.” Instead of falling apart, the EU should be pushing for further integration. 

For Estonia, becoming a member of the EU was a goal from the early 1990s. The country wanted to leave behind the traumas of its long-term membership of the Soviet Union. Estonians have generally been happy in the EU, although there have been some setbacks in public opinion, particularly as regards the rise in consumer prices and the fact that this hasn’t been accompanied by a rise in wages.

Probably the only topic on which Croatian people agree is that EU membership is good for our country. This view has been systematically reinforced by all political parties and governments, starting with the Social Democratic party of Croatia in 2000. It has formed the silent basis of all our economic development plans ever since. But our economic development plans aren’t worth the paper they are printed on. Simply put, EU development funds are a gentle lullaby that the Croatian people hum, even if they don’t know it. The level of public disinterest in the topic is mind-blowing. 

The view of the EU in Slovakia is pretty dismal. Most people I know, from workers to managers, are quite hostile towards it, mainly because of immigration policies in the wake of the refugee crisis. The fact that an anti-EU, far-right party managed to secure seats in the national parliament in 2016 is testament to the country’s attitude. There is also a general lack of knowledge about the EU’s impact on the country. This is despite the fact that a large part of Slovakia’s economic growth can be attributed to the fact the country is part of the single market. 

If the UK were to leave the EU it would send shockwaves through the other member states and set a precedent. With the public gradually leaning to the right, it would put pressure on other domestic governments to leave the EU. Those who say 

Most middle-class, educated people see the EU as a positive force that allows them to study and work abroad. However, overall the image of the EU is getting worse because of issues such as immigration, triggered by the refugee crisis. Also, there is a lot of corruption associated with the EU, and a lot of people don’t really understand the economic benefits of being part of it. For me personally, however, the EU has opened a lot of doors in terms of travel and work. I believe it has also helped the country economically. Do we like the EU? It depends whom you ask. 

In Italy most politicians have started blaming the EU for everything that has been going wrong since the economic crisis (and some seem to believe it). However, for most the EU is still seen as an opportunity for a better future. Europe is a home for Italians – we have been traveling around it for more than 2,000 years. We share hundreds of years of history with our European neighbours and have more in common than that which divides us. 

Luxembourg is one of the six founding members of the EU. We are used to being European, but that’s a consequence of being small, I suppose. Generally, you find a majority of people here who are pro-European, as the freedom of movement, currency and many other European laws have a huge impact on our economy. Moreover, we don’t seem so worried about the question of immigration because we are used to having a lot of foreigners living here. Luxembourg has always welcomed immigration and, although there have been opposing voices, it has never failed to be open and tolerant. 

The EU has to play a leading role politically, economically and socially in the future of the world. However, the fragmentation of the EU relegates us to the end of the queue, especially given the rise of global players, such as China. There’s only one way forward: united we stand, divided we fall.

Most Irish people are committed Europeans, although local politicians do tend to blame unpopular measures on the EU. I have always identified more as European than as German (I am originally from Germany). For me being part of the EU means being part of a project to overcome separation and differences and to look for shared values, peace and understanding. Being part of a united Europe means free movement and to be able to live anywhere I choose. Brexit would be a massive mistake for Britain, with disastrous consequences not only for the UK but also for other countries such as Ireland. 

Most people I know are positive about the EU, although there is of course criticism about its bureaucracy and so forth. But most people believe that the answers to today’s problems, such as global warming and terrorism, can only be tackled with a more powerful EU. I am a retired lecturer and the EU has given me the opportunity to work in Germany, Ireland, Slovenia, Spain, France, Latvia, Poland and Finland. This has certainly broadened my knowledge and understanding about other countries and cultures.

I do hope that the EU can be more than just a common market and that nationalism and populism will not hinder it from becoming stronger. Despite all our differences, we do have a lot in common, and a good compromise is not a bad thing. 

The general view in Greece is that the EU is a controlling, domineering force that doesn’t consider Greece as a genuine part of it. Greeks don’t trust the EU. That said, the majority of Greeks want to remain in it because many are working or studying abroad, and also due to the financial aid it provides. In conclusion, Greeks feel alienated in the EU, yet they are keen to stay in for now.

In general people dislike and distrust the EU in the Netherlands. The general mantra that we need the EU to be economically successful is not being chanted any more. Dutch citizens feel that they have lost all control over the EU, which in turn increasingly controls our legislation and finances.

An effective EU organisation is the way to go but the current construction only consists of undemocratically appointed back-room politicians who impose incoherent policies and fail to act effectively where it really matters. Why don’t we just appoint Angela Merkel president? After all, she runs the show. I believe that the UK leaving the EU makes sense and will not have any serious effect on its economy.

Romania sees itself as the gatekeeper of south-eastern Europe. Nobody wants to see Romania politically isolated in this corner of Europe. Also many Romanians acknowledge the EU as a refuge in case the region around us becomes even more hostile due to local politics. In any case, nobody wants the EU to disappear.

It’s also good for business, and I can work and travel without having to worry about visas and checks. Local politics are positively influenced by the EU, with many anti-corruption benefits deriving from having EU membership. Less corruption means better public services, including better transportation and medical care. It also creates work opportunities in a healthy society that, in turn, generates a lot of other more subtle social benefits.

Negativity towards the EU is now much stronger due to the migration crisis and the inability of politicians to come up with reasonable solutions. The EU should deal only with important matters, rather than what a banana or a cucumber should look like. Lately we hear the post-socialist countries should be grateful for all the funds they received from EU. If funds from the EU mean we aren’t allowed to have opinions, then we do not want any funds. We love our sovereignty and freedom of speech.

For Spaniards, the EU is something big and special. It has had a huge impact on me as I have lived abroad and had lots of amazing experiences in France and England. I have so many friends from these countries and I would miss the UK if it were to leave the EU.

We have to stay close now in the middle of the refugee crisis and work together to find a solution. We need cultural reform if we want to prevent immigration chaos. 

Views on the EU differ depending on your age. Young people, who are open-minded, maybe a bit naive, are quite supportive of the EU – mostly because they think uniting is a more progressive way to move forward. 

Older people tend to hate the EU with a passion, especially if they were quite sheltered when Latvia was part of the USSR. These are usually the same people who are closed-minded in different ways too. 

I think that the EU does a lot of good for the countries involved. It’s not perfect, but then nothing is. 

I personally believe that the EU is a great opportunity for our country. We enjoy freedom of travel, freedom of employment across the EU and

The biggest benefit of EU membership for me personally would be the shared European Central Bank interest rates. The three-month Euribor has been negative or zero for more than two years, and I’m paying off my mortgage at a rate of 0.2%, even with the bank’s fee included. Meanwhile, food prices have gone down. They are still relatively high in Finland, but have significantly decreased, despite persistent claims to the contrary. 

 The Schengen area has brought greater flexibility to travel. The benefit is not the obvious one, that as a Finn I can travel freely, but that our ex-Soviet near-neighbours have opened up, now that they belong to the eurozone. Estonia, Lithuania and Latvia were virtually no-go areas 25 years ago, but since they joined the EU and adopted the euro we have all been brought much closer.

We’re positive about the EU. We believe that it brings stability and regulates

The EU reminds me a lot of the US, albeit with difficulties due to the many different languages. It is great to be part of a united group of states that have to answer to one government and one parliament instead of being led by pie-in-the-sky nationalistic fantasies that have no place in the world any longer.

Cyprus has been an EU member state for 12 years, and many Cypriots, myself included, view this as a great opportunity for modernisation. On the other hand, the 

The EU should be reformed, and this reform should be ongoing, changing according to the needs of Europe at the time. The overall aim of the EU should always be to safeguard its citizens in both big and smaller countries. There may have been bad decisions made by the EU in the past, but overall Cyprus has greatly benefited from being part of the union. 

The Danish debate on the EU is fairly well informed because of several EU-related referendums. Every referendum causes a broad public debate. In Denmark the left wing used to see the EU as a protector of deregulation, big business and free trade. Today, the right wing is increasingly arguing against the EU, using arguments against the regulation of markets. 

I see a tendency for politicians to take less responsibility for their decisions. The attitude seems to be to blame the EU for bad or unpopular decisions, even though these decisions are democratically taken among elected politicians.

Before Bulgaria joined the EU in 2007 everyone had very high hopes for the future. Their hopes were unrealistic . After an exhausting period of almost 20 years of transition people were desperate to believe that once we joined the EU, all of Bulgaria’s problems would be solved.

Of course this didn’t happen. We 

Understandably the EU lost a little bit of its appeal, but even today Bulgaria is one of the countries where public opinion of it is most positive. This is because the EU is the shining positive example compared with what we have at home. Bulgarian politicians are viewed as thoroughly corrupt and incompetent and it’s believed the EU keeps them in check.

I have travelled a lot in the EU. I have worked in five countries. I have benefited from the Erasmus programme. So freedom of movement is extremely important to me. In Germany and in the UK I have always been treated fairly as if I were a national, even better than in my own country. The EU ensures basic rights and as a businessperson I can also sell my services easily across Europe. The EU also tries to protect customers and at least tries to protect small business, avoiding monopolies. The EU does seem very remote, but I blame French politicians for that. I love the EU. It has many flaws that we need to fix, but it is a much better institution than any national parliament.

Hungarian society is mostly pro-European, although there is a loud conservative minority close to the governing elite. 

I define myself as a radical democrat (and socialist) and I recognise some negative points about the EU. But although I am against neoliberal policies and the current form of the union, I am entirely pro-European. For me, free movement is the most important benefit of EU membership. In addition, without the financial resources of the EU and the EFTA states the academic and professional opportunities would be much less.

I and many other Lithuanians are very worried about the future of the EU. We think that if the UK leaves it could have a negative effect and destabilise member states.

Sometimes older people remember the dissolution of the Soviet Union almost 30 years ago and they compare it to events now. At first there were only various efforts in different states of the USSR to have more rights in political and financial systems. Then nationalist ideas became unstoppable. They played a vital role in Lithuania declaring independence back in 1990.

In my personal opinion, there might be a similar thing going on now and the UK leaving could lead to the collapse of the EU. I hope not.

Generally speaking I would say the EU is well received in Slovenia. Even though we feel a bit distanced from the decision-making process the people of Slovenia still perceive our inclusion as a compliment to our political process and achievements.

The main focus should be on our role inside the EU and how we contribute to it, and not solely on how can we benefit from it. Personally I do not see the EU as a magic wand that will makeeverything bad go away. Instead I see it as a great opportunity to cooperate and improve by participating. Although the participation process may seem hard and tiresome, it is still better than being left out completely with no chance of participating in the first place.

