Ireland’s economy has turned around, and support is firmly back behind the EU

2016-06-17

Ireland was the poor man of north-west Europe for almost all of the 20th century. Peripherality, isolationism and policy mistakes mired the country in relative poverty and stagnation. Few facts show better than employment how so little changed over so long. In 1991 were fewer people were at work in the Irish Republic than when the first post-independence census was taken, in 1926.

Then everything changed. In the 1990s the Irish economy exploded into life. After a decades-long stagnation, employment almost doubled in just a dozen years. In terms of income per person, as gauged by the (admittedly imperfect) GDP measure, Ireland caught up with it peers. By the turn of the century it had overtaken many, including the UK.

The period of belated catchup was intimately related to Europeanisation and globalisation, and the interaction between the two. The creation of a single market in Europe in the 1990s was exploited by Ireland like no other country. The luring of globalising companies from across the world who sought to locate in the planet’s biggest market was the greatest economic policy success in independent Ireland’s history. Their enormous presence remains the economy’s most important engine for wealth generation today, accounting for up to 90% of goods and services exported out of Ireland.

Then the crash of 2008 came. The collapse was deeper in Ireland than most other developed countries. But it was the Europe-focused export sector that provided the only engine of growth when those of the domestic economy had spluttered and died. Despite great uncertainty after the country ended up being bailed out by the infamous troika in 2010, foreign companies continue to expand their Irish operations. New ones kept coming too, with globalising American technology firms in the vanguard.

No one is under any illusion as to why they come and why they stay. They are not in Ireland for the small domestic market of 4.5 million people. They are here for the 500 million-person market that sprawls eastward all the way to Poland’s border with Ukraine.

The centrality of European market access to Irish prosperity is reflected in public and elite opinion. There are very few voices challenging the overwhelming consensus that EU membership has been good for Ireland and the view that the country’s economic model is founded on being fully integrated into the economy of the rest of the EU is close to being universally held.

The latest EU-wide opinion poll showed that we Irish had the third most positive view of the union among its 28 members

Illustrative of how just how important the EU is for Irish prosperity is the absence of anyone arguing that Ireland should follow Britain out of the EU, if that is what UK voters decide. That Ireland followed Britain into Europe in 1973, because it was believed ties were so close that we had no alternative, shows just how much the country’s orientation has changed over four decades.

But despite the widely recognised importance of the EU economically, and plenty of Brussels’ cash (mostly to farmers) over the decades, attitudes towards Europe cooled as the age of austerity dawned. That is almost entirely to do with eurozone membership.

After the Lehman crash and the onset of crisis in 2008, being part of the euro was seen as a protective shield. When people looked north to Iceland, they saw not only collapsing banks, something that Ireland faced too, but a collapsing krona. Being part of a global currency saved the economy from the added whammy of exchange rate volatility that would have been inevitable if the old Irish pound had still been legal tender.

But the outbreak of the Greek crisis less than 18 months later marked a shift, for Ireland as well as Europe. Instead of protecting its members, the euro became the perfect transmission mechanism for contagion. In November 2010 Ireland became the second eurozone country to be bailed out. What happened subsequently generated unprecedented controversy and criticism about the role of European institutions and fellow member countries.

It should be said that Ireland’s woes were overwhelmingly self-inflicted. A huge property bubble in the years up to 2008 was not controlled. Hubris had set in. The government of the time came to believe the economy was invulnerable. But none of this is to say that the response to the eurozone crisis was the right one, either for the bloc as a whole or for individual members. The most controversial single issue was the European Central Bank’s (ECB) role in rescuing Ireland’s banks.

Elected politicians in Dublin acted of their own volition in using taxpayers’ money to pay private bank debts, but not in every case. Two separate Irish governments deemed it worth allowing a small portion of the liabilities to be defaulted on. The ECB, worried about another shock to an already fragile European financial system, took a different view. That added about €4bn to public debt. Whether Frankfurt was right or wrong, for a largely unaccountable entity to impose private debts on a sovereign people has left a bitter taste.

However, these controversies are being left behind as Ireland’s economy has recovered strongly – employment has risen by more since 2012 than in the 70 years after independence. This has led to public opinion shifting back to its previous strong support for Europe.

The latest EU-wide Eurobarometer opinion poll showed that we Irish had the third most positive view of the union among its 28 members. Only 14% viewed it negatively. In a world in which electorates are angry and often willing to blame first and ask questions later, this turnaround is as remarkable as the Irish economy’s.

