Pound and shares jump as investors await referendum result – as it happened

2016-06-23

So the FTSE has closed up at the highest level since 21 April, at 6,338.1.

The pound hit a six-month high against the dollar, rising above $1. 48 for the first time in 2016.

Sterling is currently up 0.7% at $1.4807. It is also up 0.1% against the euro at €1.3030.

In the US, Wall Street is also making strong gains.

That’s it for today. Our main referendum blog is still running and covering all the key political developments:

Thank you for joining us today. AM

The FTSE 100 has staged a late rally as trading comes to a close for the day.

Earlier in the day it was up by more than 100 points, but the majority of the gains were lost as investor nerves picked up - leaving the FTSE up just 18 points at one point.

The FTSE has closed for the day at 6,338.1, up 77 points or 1.2%.

Here is how things look at the close elsewhere in Europe:

Andy Scott, economist at HiFX, has a good take on the pound:

After clocking up an impressive rally of nearly 2% on Thursday - hitting a 6-month high against the US dollar as the polls showed a late swing to a Remain vote - sterling reversed course sharply this afternoon.

GBP/USD fell 200 points from its high to $1.4750 as traders took profits on the earlier rally, positioning themselves cautiously ahead of a still uncertain outcome.

Leading into this evening, we expect liquidity to fall further as banks reign in FX activity, especially in GBP transactions with no one wanting to get their fingers burnt by the expected big moves that are possible in either direction.

We expect some initial reaction in Sterling to the exit polls after 10pm, with the main excitement likely to be in the early hours of Friday morning once we starting getting the results in.

The pound is up 0.5% against the dollar at $1.4777.

It’s up 0.07% against the euro at €1.3024.

Latest on the markets:

Europe:

Wall Street:

Brits have been rushing to buy their holiday money according to No.1 Currency.

The foreign exchange firm said business jumped by 70% on Wednesday, with queues forming at some of its 102 high street stores, and online sales up 300%.

Simon Phillips, retail director at No.1 Currency:

Demand has rocketed for all foreign currencies, but euros and dollars are proving especially popular.

Our stores came close to running out of the most popular currencies on Wednesday, and as high demand continues today we’ve dramatically increased stock levels to cope with the surge in demand during the final hours before the result is announced.

So it appears that investors are feeling a little less bold this afternoon, with referendum jitters creeping back in.

Connor Campbell of Spredex has a view:

Things have calmed down somewhat since that midday frenzy, the European indices looking increasing nervy as closing time creeps closer.

The indices receded from their midday peaks, instead returning to the calmer trading seen earlier in the morning.

So, that’s almost it. One imagines that regardless of the result tomorrow with be a far more hectic day of trading, be it caused by a post-Brexit plunge or a relieved wave of investors pouring back in to buy up the pound et al.

UK investors are losing some enthusiasm now.

The FTSE 100 is up 18 points or 0.3% at 6,278 - smaller gains than we saw earlier in the day when the FTSE was up more than 100 points at 6,371 at one point.

The pound’s gains against the dollar have also slowed, with sterling up 0.7% at $1.4810. It had hit a high of $1.4948 at one point on Thursday morning.

More positive news on the US economy... this time from the manufacturing sector.

The headline index on Markit’s “flash” manufacturing PMI survey rose to a three-month of high of 51.4 in June, from 50.7 in May (where anything above 50 indicates expansion). Growth in exports was the main driver of growth.

It was better than expected, with economists forecasting 50.8 for the headline index combing output, new orders and employment.

Output in the sector grew modestly, and new business increased at an accelerated rate, boosted by the fastest pace in export sales since September 2014.

Chris Williamson, chief economist at Markit responded with caution to the better-than-expected PMI:

The flash PMI for June brought welcome news of improved performance of manufacturing, but the sector still looks to have acted as a drag on the economy in the second quarter, leaving the economy reliant on the service sector and consumers in particular to drive growth.

Any improvement could be largely traced to better export sales, in turn linked to the weakening of the dollar compared to earlier in the year. Domestic demand was again worryingly weak, especially from business customers, meaning overall growth of order books remained subdued.

US markets are up in early trading, echoing the upbeat sentiment in Europe.

Away from the markets, US jobless claims fell more sharply than expected last week according to figures from the Labor Department.

The number of new claims for unemployment benefits fell to 259,000 in the week ending 18 June, from 277,000 a week earlier. It was the biggest drop since February and close to a 43-year low touched in March.

Economists polled by Reuters were expecting a smaller drop to 270,000.

US #jobless claims fall to a near 43-year lowhttps://t.co/1xMol7sF8W

Wall Street is expected to open higher:

US Opening Calls:#DOW 17928 +0.83%#SPX 2102 +0.84%#NASDAQ 4441 +0.84%#IGOpeningCall

On a lighter note, a horse named Brexit is taking to the turf at the Newbury racecourse tonight, at 6.10pm.

But it’s unlikely to triumph, with Betfair offering 12-1 odds on Brexit galloping home first.

I mentioned earlier that the cost of insuring against the pound either plunging or soaring overnight had soared.

That’s still true. But, the cost of insuring against wild swings over the next week has fallen. That suggests investors are less worried about a sterling crisis kicking off tomorrow.

#Brexit risk collapses... pic.twitter.com/wYopZ3e4u1

Amid today’s rally, some analysts are urging traders not to get carried away. Not a single vote has been counted yet.

Peter Rosenstreich, head of market strategy Swissquote Bank, says investors need to trade very carefully, and keep an eye on the North East city of Sunderland...

One of the earlier constituencies to declare a result should be Sunderland, viewed as a Brexit bellwether. Should Sunderland result in a close result or an outright majority vote to “remain”, then it is assumed that a “remain” vote will triumph.

By 05:00am BST, 80% of authorities are expected to have made their respective declarations, providing a clearer view of the outcome.

Foreign exchange group UKForex has seen a 100% increase in consumers making transfers from the pound into other currencies, in the last 24 hours.

The majority are transferring from sterling to euros.

William Shepherd, global head of treasury at UK Forex, says some customers are concerned that the cost of buying a European property could rocket if the pound drops tomorrow.

Shepherd explains:

“If the UK opts to leave, the pound could fall as much as 20%. Consumers could lose up to £1,398 on a £10,000 transfer, compared to today’s rate.”

