Why Brexit makes a visceral appeal to the older generation’s psyche

2016-06-21

“I still can’t make up my mind”. “Well, you’ve only got a day or two”. “No facts, that’s the problem”. “You mean, no respect, they talk as though we’re no use”. “Right, like Britain’s past it”.

It’s post-bingo cafe time, and the European Union debate continues to rage. I couldn’t help feeling that both the language and the passion reflected something more than ideology. There was personal offence. And when Cecil rounded it off with “as if we can’t stand on our own feet”, it was clear to me what was really getting under the crumblies’ skin.

The remain camp is offering an argument that, by its focus on the nation’s dependence on support, will alienate elderly people because it resonates with our personal daily experience. As our competencies decline, we become dependent on others for help. And we resent it.

“And those careworkers, half of them don’t speak English.” Joyce threw in the curve ball.

Distasteful perhaps, but for many old people it has sharp-end cred. They are daily recipients of care from others, many of whom are migrants, and whose service – thanks to tightened budgets – is unsatisfactory. The grumbly generation doesn’t tend to distinguish between the piper and the people who pay.

The Brexit camp has exploited this. Its mantra “take control” makes a visceral appeal to the crumblies’ psyche; to retrieve control of our personal lives is high on our wish list, our failure to do so a daily experience. The prospect of independence takes us back to the good old days when we did things “our way”, unaided by Johnny Foreigner.

This menu of nostalgia and xenophobia is a toxic dish with a peculiar appeal to the elderly palate.

And the grey vote is critical. It decided the last election and looks likely to swing the referendum. Yet, instead of exploring what floats the elderly boat, the remain camp has wilfully adopted a theme that focuses on economic dependence and public security – and causes maximum offence to this crucial constituency. After all, we are the most vociferous opponents of the nanny culture, with its bleatings about health and safety.

We want our lives back, the restoration of personal dominion, so when Brexit tells us that if we leave, we will “get our country back” and restore its sovereignty, it hits the crumbly spot.

In spite of its appeals to prejudice, its economy with the truth, its cavalier disregard for honesty, Brexit has been able to claim a sort of integrity. It has contrived to appear principled and patriotic. It’s got chutzpah.

My generation has been cast as lead players in a major tragedy. The nightmare clouds of a perfect societal storm are massing on the horizon, for which we must hold ourselves responsible. We have already created a planetary crisis for our grandchildren, a sustained war on terror, the absence of affordable shelter, and a deficit in worthwhile and properly rewarded work.

Now, we are going to exploit our grey vote to reverse an evolutionary journey that has been characterised by the human genius for collaboration, from family to tribe to clan to state to united nations. The poet John Donne warned us of this 400 years ago. Britain may be an island, but it is not entire of itself. “If a clod be washed away by the sea, Europe is the less.”

And I won’t be around to experience it. Along with the vast majority of my contemporaries, by the time “the bell tolls” I will be in my grave. There’s still time to change the script.

