Remainers, your country needs you. Spread the word, and make a difference

2016-06-18

We have just six days to keep Britain in the European Union – and the result will depend on you. Precisely because polls suggest this contest is too close to call, because everyone is sick to death of the claim and counterclaim, and because it’s ultimately a question of personal judgment, the voices of individual friends and neighbours can make all the difference. Politically, the coming week is the most important one in Britain for 40 years, and one of the most pivotal for Europe.

So if you live in Britain, and want us to remain, please talk to everyone you know. Reach out to those you think may be undecided or veering towards leave. Send that email; make the telephone call to your aunt or grandad. Ensure the postal votes go off in time. Volunteer via the Britain Stronger in Europe website. And follow the advice of Sue Vaughan: after herself pounding the streets of Norwich, she wrote to the Guardian this week urging us all to “just get out and speak to 10 people and see how it goes”. That’s what I’ll be doing this Sunday. If 100,000 of us meet the Vaughan target, that will be 1 million people canvassed.

And if you don’t live in Britain, like most of the Guardian’s online readers, how about messaging, emailing or calling 10 of your British friends?

I’m not going to rehearse again all the arguments for why the fate of two unions, the British and the European, will hang on the result – not to mention the economic dangers. But something else is also at stake: whether democracy can prevail over manipulation, common sense over hysteria, facts over lies.

Several times in recent months I have heard distinguished elderly gents, some of them unelected lords, murmuring in well-carpeted rooms that of course this referendum business is the root of the trouble: we have representative democracy, and it’s really a terrible idea to ask the people directly.

Leaving aside the obvious question of how exactly the House of Lords embodies representative democracy, I can see that, back in the day, this was a respectable constitutional argument. But as the constitutional expert Vernon Bogdanor points out, referendums on important issues have long since been a part of Britain’s unwritten constitution, and few issues are as important as this. That’s why I have long supported an in/out referendum on Britain’s EU membership, and will not resile from that, whatever the result. “Let the British people decide” both sounds like, and is, a fundamentally democratic view.

That said, the scale of mendacity and manipulation in this referendum campaign has been breathtaking. We always knew we would be up against a predominantly Eurosceptic press. A recent content analysis by Loughborough University shows that, if you look at the balance of articles in national dailies and weigh the results to allow for circulation, then over the month to 8 June the national press coverage was 82% for out against 18% for in. And even by the tabloids’ own low standards, front page stories such as the Sun’s notorious “Queen backs Brexit” have plumbed new depths of misrepresentation.

Meanwhile, Boris Johnson’s battle bus has travelled the country with what is literally a big lie painted in giant letters on its side: “We send the EU £350m a week”. Even if you don’t count the money Britain gets back from the EU, you must deduct the rebate negotiated by Margaret Thatcher, which reduces the figure to £250m in 2015. Yet through my letter box pops a Vote Leave leaflet headed “official information about the referendum” and saying, “FACT: … £350m every week – the cost of a new hospital.”

If you have ever wondered how the truth would get buried in Britain, this homeland of sceptical empiricism, here’s your answer: in Britain the facts get trashed in the name of Facts.

The BBC has become somewhat more robust since I last wrote about its referendum broadcasting, but I doubt that its cautious coverage begins to compensate for these baroque excesses. The vigorous cross-questioning of politicians by members of the audience on Question Time is brilliant. There have also been some very good documentary and analysis programmes. But the daily news coverage still tends to report this story as a political contest in Westminster: the Boris versus Dave show.

This very morning I heard someone conclude a report by saying that next Thursday’s vote will decide the fate not just of Britain but of David Cameron (glad that syntax got the priorities right). We can’t say loudly enough that this is not about them: it’s about us – about the future of our families, our country, our continent.

That’s why we need to reclaim democracy not as a spectator sport but as a game in which we are all players, not distorted by the spinning machines of what the Russians call “political technology” but face to face, on the streets, in the shops, in the pubs and our own homes. Real people debating with real people: democracy as practised when it was first invented in ancient Athens, in the assembly, the marketplace and the olive grove.

We can’t always be doing this, but this week, of all weeks, we should. Like Pericles. Like Sue Vaughan.

