'Why upset the apple cart?' asks a farmer after Brexit

2016-06-24

In the Moon Under Water pub in Boston, the UK’s most pro-Brexit town, William Bradley started to cry on Friday lunchtime. The Lincolnshire arable farmer, who for decades has relied on “amazing” workers from eastern Europe to plant the broccoli and cauliflower he grows for Tesco, was trying to come to terms with the EU referendum result, and it hurt.

Questions of access to labour, the falling pound and what will happen to the EU subsidies that make his wheat crop viable were all on his mind. But as with so many remainers across the UK on Friday, it was his fears for future generations that triggered the tears. “It doesn’t matter to me – I am 67,” he said, his voice cracking. “People don’t realise what this means. But they will … Stability is a wonderful thing.”

Gesturing to his friends who voted out, Bradley added: “We can all afford a beer. This is a good life. Why upset the apple cart?”

His was a lone voice in a pub busy with some of the 75.6% Boston voters who sided with leave on Thursday. They were mostly middle-aged and retired men who complained about foreign workers crushing wages, clogging up the NHS and “degrading” the town by drinking in the streets.

“There’s too many foreigners,” said Lesley Gardner, 74, a retired lorry driver. “I used to start at 5am and finish at 11am for £100. The foreigners will do the same for £40. I believe leaving will increase the wages again.”

“I am not concerned about them coming and working, but I am concerned about the social effects,” said Peter Massam, 48, a petrol tanker driver. “They are not interested in integration, it’s harder to get GP appointments, and I had a problem getting my child into primary school.”

There is no doubting the impact the free movement of people across the EU has had in Boston, where the streets resound with eastern European languages and rents have risen because landlords are able to pack more migrant workers into each home than UK citizens will accept.

Of the towns and cities that voted most strongly for Brexit, Boston saw by far the greatest levels of net migration in the last recorded year, with 1,364 more foreigners arriving than leaving between June 2014 and June 2015. In 2011, 13% of Boston’s 64,637 population was born abroad, and in January, the town was named the least integrated in England by the Policy Exchange thinktank.

In the marketplace, migrants and English residents tried to make sense of the Brexit vote. Nigella Glasukaite, 55, a Lithuanian auxiliary nurse at the town’s Pilgrim hospital said she was “afraid the European Union was collapsing”. “I am sad,” she said. “We have worked so hard to be together, with free movement to give people a better future, and now everything is changing.”

She talked with Nick, 50, a local plumber, about the need for more integration between different cultures. “I have lived here all my life and it’s happened too fast,” he said. “There has not been enough integration and that feels alienating.”

For Nick and the large majority in Boston, the time to keep trying is now over. But while many of the Brexiters sank a celebratory lunchtime pint, there was a reminder of how the British economy relies on EU labour. Outside the health clinic, several dozen young eastern Europeans, many here just for the summer, waited to board shuttle buses to their 10-hour shifts bagging salad for Asda and Aldi. Around the corner, on West Street, lined with eastern European grocers, Illona, 33, a Lithuanian who runs the Baltic Food Store, agreed that there were problems with immigration.

“I think it’s time to stop migration because it has become too much,” she said. “English people are angry because they think we don’t want to speak English. Some of us don’t want to integrate. But in 13 years of being here, I have never had a problem with a neighbour. We are friendly, we have made a life here, and I don’t think about going back to Lithuania. I don’t need benefits; I work a lot and pay taxes and I don’t see why we should leave.”

Daniel Kiszewski, 19, who runs the neighbouring Polish mini-mart, said he couldn’t understand the referendum decision. Kiszewski, who came to the UK from Poland at the age of three, said he had rarely felt any tension between communities. “Look at Germany,” he said. “They are experiencing 10 times worse [immigration] than us, but I don’t see them getting crazy about it.”

Michael Brooks, the deputy leader of Boston borough council, said he was pleased with the vote, and said the European Union should have helped with the impact on services and housing. “The issues were raised time and time again locally,” he said. “People got very, very frustrated.”

