American friends fear UK voters may back Brexit for all the wrong reasons

2016-06-18

‘Taking back control’ is a slogan not a strategy, argues the former ambassador to the US. The EU referendum calls for a calm assessment of risks and interests




f one result of 

Arriving in New York for a brief visit as the news of Jo’s murder broke, that was the mood I found among American friends. They were as horrified as we Britons all are, despite having themselves to cope with the shock of 

Friends abroad read the same polls and betting odds as the rest of us. 

In Thursday’s referendum, which is far more important for the future of our country than any general election, this is dangerous. We need to ask ourselves some searching questions. Whether or not we think this referendum was necessary, we need to think very carefully about what is at stake.

Take immigration. Of course there are pressures on our public services. But we have taken only a handful of the Syrian refugees fleeing for their lives. Despite the influx of foreign nationals from within the EU, many of them helping our booming services industry remain competitive, our unemployment levels are less than half the European average and lower than at any time since before the crisis of 2007-08. And visa-free access for Turks to Schengen countries won’t affect Britain. 

Turkey joining the EU would, of course. But that’s still years away and subject to both Turkey meeting the membership criteria and the approval of every single member state. So are we perhaps worrying too much?

'Taking back control', like Trump’s 'Make America great again', is a slogan not a strategy

Brussels has indeed failed to solve the Eurozone crisis. But just as opting out of Schengen protects us from immigration from outside the EU, so our decision not to be part of the single currency protects us from Eurozone contagion and bail-outs. 

Our friends abroad – with the notable exceptions of Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin – cannot understand why we Brits are seriously considering voluntarily downgrading our international influence and jeopardising our economic recovery, the envy of the western world. 

Of course, they would not be risking accusations of unwarranted interference in our domestic affairs if they didn’t also have good reasons of their own to be worried. American entrepreneurs want to continue to invest in the most business-friendly and rapidly growing economy in the single market: 

For their part, continental Europeans fear that an EU without the UK will be less of a global force, less able to deal with the challenges to Europe’s security and prosperity, less able to stand up effectively to others throwing their weight around.

And they fear that a vote for Brexit could generate irresistible pressure for referendums to be held in other countries. 

But walking away, or beginning a process which leads to the unravelling of the entire structure, is a cop-out, not a solution. “Taking back control”, like Trump’s “Make America great again”, is a slogan not a strategy. 

We should calmly assess the risks of voting to leave, realise that on balance it’s not worth the gamble, and start work in earnest on 24 June with our fellow Europeans on an urgent programme to get the EU back on the rails. 

