Jeremy Corbyn to issue pro-EU rallying cry to wavering Labour voters

2016-06-21

Jeremy Corbyn is to launch a call for Britain to remain in the European Union amid concerns that Labour’s traditional supporters could vote to leave in the referendum on Thursday. As the campaign enters its final two days, the Labour leader will tell supporters that leaving the EU would put Britain’s economic recovery at risk and threaten a “bonfire of employment rights”.

The rallying cry to party members comes after criticisms from some on the remain side that Corbyn has been lukewarm in his commitment to the campaign. The leave camp has privately revealed that it has gained the backing of many traditional Labour supporters, particularly outside major cities.

Corbyn will appear on Tuesday in Manchester alongside the former home secretary Alan Johnson, the chairman of remain group Labour In.

In some his most pro-EU comments yet, Corbyn will say: “On 23 June we are faced with a choice: do we remain to protect jobs and prosperity in Britain that depend on trade with Europe? Or do we step into an unknown future with leave, where a Tory-led Brexit risks economic recovery and threatens a bonfire of employment rights?

“A vote for remain is a vote to put our economy first. On Thursday, join me in voting remain to protect jobs and rights at work.”

His intervention is part of a day of action for senior Labour figures, with Ed Miliband speaking in Luton, Harriet Harman in Birmingham, Gordon Brown in Glasgow and the deputy party leader, Tom Watson, travelling to Brighton.

At a question and answer session on Sky News on Monday, Corbyn again expressed his reservations about the EU, but argued that voters should choose to stay in it. He said the EU must change “dramatically” if Britain remains a member following the vote. “It’s a big decision. If we stay in Europe, there are implications; if we leave Europe, there are massive implications,” he said.

“But it is also a turning point, because if we leave, I don’t think there is an easy way back. If we remain, I believe Europe has got to change quite dramatically to something much more democratic, much more accountable, and share our wealth and improve our living standards, and our working conditions, all across the whole continent.

“I’m not a lover of the European Union. I think it’s a rational decision. We should stay in order to try and improve, but does that change my views on points I’ve raised on public ownership of railways and things like that? Absolutely not.”

When asked if he would shoulder some of the blame in the event of a vote to leave, Corbyn replied: “I’m not going to take blame for people’s decisions. There will be a decision made on Thursday. I’m hoping there is going to be a remain vote; there may well be a remain vote, there may well be a leave vote.”

Told that he did not sound “too keen” on the EU, the Labour leader replied: “Whatever the result, we have got to work with it.”

In a further development, Len McCluskey has told the Guardian that the enlargement of the EU in the 2000s was a “gigantic experiment” conducted at the expense of ordinary British workers. McCluskey, the head of the Unite union, wrote that he was not surprised that Labour voters were concerned about immigration.

“In the last 10 years, there has been a gigantic experiment at the expense of ordinary workers. Countries with vast historical differences in wage rates and living standards have been brought together in a common labour market,” he said. “The result has been sustained pressure on living standards, a systematic attempt to hold down wages, and to cut the costs of social provision for working people.”

On Sunday, Corbyn told Andrew Marr that he did not believe that there could be an upper limit on immigration while there was free movement within the EU, causing some concern among Labour MPs. Ten countries joined the EU in 2004: Hungary, Poland, Czech Republic, Slovakia, Slovenia, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta and Cyprus. Romania and Bulgaria joined in 2007.

In a further sign of tensions on the remain side, Alan Johnson has conceded that the campaign is “struggling” with some serious challenges. During the Guardian’s Politics Weekly podcast, he said the referendum “is kind of turning into a referendum on Cameron’s vainglorious policy of reducing immigration to the tens of thousands, which he was never going to do”.

The former home secretary said this was the dynamic “as soon as the [second quarter] immigration statistics came out, and we’re still struggling with the after-effects of that”.

