Yellen warns on Brexit, as Draghi says ECB is ready to take action -as it happened

2016-06-21

After a shaky start it looked like markets would fail to build on Monday’s strong gains. But shares moved into positive territory by the close as Wall Street edged higher and polls indicated the Remain camp was slightly ahead. But investors were still uneasy ahead of Thursday’s vote. The final scores showed:

On Wall Street the Dow Jones Industrial Average is now 29 points or 0.16% higher.

Sterling hit a five and a half month high before falling back, trading down 0.12% at $1.4659.

On that note, it’s time to close for the evening. Thanks for your comments, and we’ll be back tomorrow.

Janet Yellen has now finished her testimony.

Another warning there may be liquidity problems on Friday following the referendum result:

Tweeted BAML this morning, now UBS reminding clients of potentially dodgy liquidity Friday. pic.twitter.com/4HkcdiTm3A

European markets closed higher, but Joshua Mahony, market analyst at IG, expects further volatility ahead of the EU vote:

The prospects of a Brexit appears to be on a knife edge just two days before the UK goes to the polls. The IG Survation poll shows a clear narrowing between ‘remain’ (45%) and ‘leave’ (44%) campaigns, with the result likely to be dictated by the factors such as turnout and the action of the so far undecided (11%) voters.

Yesterday may have seen a sharp relief rally in GBPUSD as ‘leave’ swung back into the lead, yet the increasingly ‘too close to call’ nature of this referendum should provide a highly unpredictable and volatile week in the markets. While there is only a marginal lead for ‘remain’ when polls are concerned, the IG Binary (currently 72% remain) shows that the money is clearly backing a decision to remain in the EU.

Back with US Federal Reserve chair Janet Yellen’s testimony to Congress. Asked further about Brexit Yellen says:

It could launch a period of uncertainty [with] negative economic consequences for the UK spilling over into Europe.

The market reaction could result in a risk off sentiment that we would see impact on the financial markets. We might see a flight to safety which might push up the dollar and other safe haven currencies.

I don’t want to overblow the likely impacts but we will watch it carefully.

Could Brexit push the US into recession?

I don’t think that is the most likely case, but we just don’t know what will happen.

Fund manager Hargreaves Lansdown is the latest firm to say it will extend opening hours and has tripled its number of dealing staff to deal with the aftermath of the EU referendum vote.

Could we see an emergency bank holiday in the event of Brexit? Or even a Sunday trading session. Joe Rundle, head of trading at ETX Capital, said:

George Soros is correct to say that a Brexit could lead to a catastrophic day for the pound but preparing for a re-run of Black Wednesday is not easy.

Very few of those working on trading desks in 1992 are still in the City so there is something of the unknown about what’s coming. Even the dark days of Lehmans are a distant memory for most traders. If Britain votes out, it’s fair to say we will not have seen a day in the markets quite like it.

The worry is that a collapse in sterling today could be much more devastating than it was a quarter of a century ago.

If the markets go completely crazy we could see an emergency Bank Holiday declared, or even a Sunday trading session to limit panic and losses.

Financial markets are much more interconnected than they were in the early 90s, although the processes and trading systems have come a long way.

Speed and access to market information is much faster today than it was back in 1992 and Brexit is a known quantity in the sense that we know when it will happen if it does. Crashing out of ERM took everyone by surprise.

Central banks are ready to step in with extra liquidity should markets be thrown into chaos and the Bank of England has currency swap lines in place if required.

But it’s interesting that the Bank of England says uptake of its most recent extra liquidity auction was lower than expected, which either suggests that UK banks do not anticipate Brexit happening or they have plenty of liquidity to play with. Confidence is high for Remain but markets may be underestimating the chances of Brexit.

Equities are more complex. A slump in sterling could be net positive for FTSE 100 companies as up to 80% of earnings come from abroad. In fact the DAX and CAC may be a lot more exposed than the UK’s blue chip index.

Yellen had said at previous testimonies that the Fed was looking into whether negative rates would be legal. Asked for an update she says:

We have the legal basis to pursue negative rates but it is not something we are considering or looking at.

Back with Yellen and the Fed chair says a UK exit from the European Union could bring a period of uncertainty and financial volatility and affect the US outlook. She said the banks had put in place enhancements to liquidity [in the case of Brexit].

#Fed Chair #Yellen testimony strikes highly cautious tone similar to her #FOMC press conference comments

In another sign of mounting concern over Thursday’s vote, global law firm Dechert has set up a new hotline for clients who need expert advice about Brexit.

They’ll be staffing it with lawyers, who can explain the legal implications if Britain votes to leave the EU.

Miriam Gonzalez, co-chair of the firm’s International Trade and Government Regulation practice, says a Leave victory would create “enormous legal uncertainty”.

Clients will need to react to questions from employees, shareholders and investors, as well as assess which areas of their businesses would be most at risk.

At Dechert we realise that speed will be of essence in the days following the referendum to avoid such legal uncertainly impacting negatively on our clients and that is why we are creating the tools to allow clients to have access to the expertise they will need.

Draghi is quizzed further on Brexit and what problems he foresees.

He says:

I don’t want to speculate on the outcome or the consequences.

We monitor all economic, political and legal developments so we can assess and manage the ensuing risks.

Mostly, to be able to stabilise markets, provide liquidity. We have existing swap lines with other central banks. The agreements are there, we want to make sure they are useable, active and adequate.

The event will have short and long term effects. It is hard to say what sort of action we would take in each contingency.

Back with Draghi on Brexit:

Draghi: There are extensive consultations of all central banks in the world and the IMF, but no plans and no commitments #Brexit

Draghi: No Plan To Work With UK On Brexit -- BBG

Federal Reserve chair Janet Yellen has again warned of the risk of the UK voting to leave the European Union. In her testimony to Congress she said:

In the current environment of sluggish growth, low inflation, and already very accommodative monetary policy in many advanced economies, investor perceptions of and appetite for risk can change abruptly. One development that could shift investor sentiment is the upcoming referendum in the United Kingdom. A U.K. vote to exit the European Union could have significant economic repercussions.

She also expressed concerns about the domestic US market and the outlook for China:

The latest readings on the labor market and the weak pace of investment illustrate one downside risk--that domestic demand might falter. In addition, although I am optimistic about the longer-run prospects for the U.S. economy, we cannot rule out the possibility expressed by some prominent economists that the slow productivity growth seen in rece

Although concerns about slowing growth in China and falling commodity prices appear to have eased from earlier this year, China continues to face considerable challenges as it rebalances its economy toward domestic demand and consumption and away from export-led growth.

So that means the Fed is “closely monitoring global economic and financial developments” and taking a cautious approach to raising interest rates:

The FOMC continues to anticipate that economic conditions will improve further and that the economy will evolve in a manner that will warrant only gradual increases in the federal funds rate. In addition, the Committee expects that the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below the levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run because headwinds--which include restraint on U.S. economic activity from economic and financial developments abroad, subdued household formation, and meager productivity growth--mean that the interest rate needed to keep the economy operating near its potential is low by historical standards.

