The referendum campaigns have revealed a fractured country

2016-06-23

It was a day of sudden, torrential downpours that felt as if nature was echoing politics. We waded through floods and queued at polling stations and argued on Twitter about whether to use a pen and risk invalidating our vote, or pencil and risk, it was rumoured, MI5 changing it. Britain has survived the deluge, and cast its vote. We the people, as David Cameron promised more than three years ago in his Bloomberg speech, got our say.

It is the end of a campaign that has lasted seven weeks – since the elections in May – or five months, which was when the prime minister completed his negotiations with Brussels. Or, for a group of hardcore Tory leavers, 24 years – since June 1992 when Denmark voted against the Maastricht treaty and inspired a handful of MPs to launch their Eurosceptic revolt on the right.

In the same way that an unusually low tide occasionally reveals an ancient henge, the referendum campaign has exposed a chasm in British politics. Now the politicians who did so much to exacerbate the divide have to heal it. They have to find the language and the policies to rebuild the sense of solidarity that the past weeks have done so much to fracture.

It is not all the fault of Europolitics. The rise of a populist, anti-elitist movement has been plain enough in the polling statistics since the 2008 crash and before. It was unmistakeable in the rise of Ukip at the last election. There are insurgent parties and politicians in almost every democracy. But a referendum campaign thrives by entrenching difference. It legitimises new alliances and it erodes the tribal loyalties that might otherwise shore up the vote for traditional parties.

Now the geography of the vote reveals it in unflinching detail. There is an English pessimism which grows stronger the further from London and the south-east you travel. Islands of metropolitan optimism are matched in Scotland, parts of Wales and Northern Ireland where countries with developing independent identities see their relationship with Brussels as integral to their future.

The new politics is divided by geography and also by class. YouGov tracks remain support at 70% for graduates and leave support at 68% among those whose education stopped at GCSE. It is shaped by the kind of work that you do and the kind of neighbours that you have – or fear that you might have. It is about immigration, but it’s about a sense of control that has been lost, at least as much as it is about xenophobia or racism. It’s overstretched public services and 10 neighbours living in a flat for four and it’s private wealth and public squalor.

In the same way that Labour had lost Scotland long before it jointly campaigned with the Tories on the independence vote two years ago, these distinctions have been emerging for a decade or more. What the referendum has done is to throw them into relief. It has driven the motor of democratic politics off the road and it will be a hard, slow business getting it back on track.

Now the campaign is over, what mattered during it gets clearer. For both sides, it was a contest cut adrift from normal political discourse. It became a lurid battle of post-truth politics. Like an argument between an unhappy couple, we stood at the national kitchen sink with our voices raised, our language coarsened, misrepresentation and acrimony each fuelling the other.

The country has split into rival camps and difference has hardened into grievance. Yet often, we could not even decide what we were arguing about. Those of us who were sure we wanted to stay made our case in terms of the economy, security and prosperity. Those who were convinced the right answer was to leave responded by talking about taking back control, policing borders, repatriating our democracy. There was a reluctance to engage with the arguments of the other side that left people in the middle dazed and confused, crying out for facts that would seal the argument one way or the other.

Facts became weapons, but so were non-facts. Truth was treated as a malleable concept. It got harder and harder to distinguish between evidence-backed argument and mere prejudice. But if remain sometimes exaggerated, leave was shameless, driving round the country in a battle bus with a £350m lie plastered along its sides.

Inevitably in a British argument about Europe, there was a walk-on part for Hitler. The cerebral Michael Gove ridiculed the validity of expert opinion and cited Nazi attempts to recruit fellow mathematicians to undermine the Jewish Albert Einstein. There was a skirmish about which side Churchill would have backed. Boris Johnson tried to equate the project of ever closer union with Nazi ambition to command all of Europe.

But talk to the leavers and they see a different picture. They went into the campaign with an underdog’s grudge. They complained from the start about an asymmetry of authority and they were duly outgunned by George Osborne wielding economic predictions based on the Treasury model supported by external economists. At the grassroots level, where politics is more raw, there is a burning sense of injury, a conviction that it is not them but the remain campaign that distorted the evidence. This wound will not be swift to heal.

There are facts, and then there was immigration. As Nigel Farage observed on the last day of campaigning, the day the net migration figures were published at the end of May, showing a near record high of 330,000, was the day the out camp got momentum. That was the moment when a debate at least superficially about Britain in Europe began to morph into a referendum on immigration.

It was not only the fact of the net migration figures that swung the polls against remain. It was the way they exposed Cameron’s unwise, unachievable commitment to cutting migration to the tens of thousands. And on its foundations came the one big lie, the most wretched propaganda strike in a campaign where the truth so often felt expendable: the claim that Turkish accession to the EU was just around the corner. The suggestion of 75 million Turkish migrants became a lethal proxy for all migration from Europe. It fed into an unspoken xenophobia and legitimised an undertone of racism.

The alarming claims of both sides fuelled the sense that ordinary voters were being asked to take a decision that belonged to politicians. It was as if party goers at the eve-of-Waterloo ball were asked for a battle plan. Even worse was the sense that we voters had become unwilling participants in a novel version of the Eton wall game, retailored for old people. We were embroiled in a vote on the future of the Tory party. When Johnson declared for leave, he did not just give them a figurehead, he sounded the firing gun for a leadership campaign. But then, it was Cameron who made a referendum an instrument of party management.

Two political moves and a tragedy changed the mood. The Ukip Breaking Point poster of queueing migrants might have been enough on its own to provoke a revolt from thinking leavers. Osborne’s punishment budget worked at least on the level of a dead cat strategy – bringing attention back to focus on the economy.

But most of all the awful death of the Labour MP Jo Cox chilled the atmosphere. Like a country unexpectedly drenched in icy water, the whole nation shook its head in bewilderment and came to its senses. As the results are digested, it is her commitment to finding what unites people rather than what divides them that should be basis for recovery.

