EU referendum live: Khan accuses Boris Johnson of leading 'Project Hate' in BBC's Great Debate

2016-06-21

That’s all from me for tonight.

Thanks for the comments.

This is what Labour are saying about tonight’s debate. Here is an extract from the briefing the party has sent out.

Remain clearly won the debate tonight, making the case for why Britain is better off in. Better off in for jobs, rights at work, lower prices and our NHS.

Sadiq Khan made the positive Labour case for remaining in the EU. It brings us jobs, growth and investment, protects British workers and consumers and helps keep us safe. Leaving would put that at risk and diminish Britain’s influence in the world.

In contrast, the leave campaign had no answers on the big issues facing the country.

Even Labour’s Tom Watson is praising Ruth Davidson.

That Ruth Davidson had done her homework before the EU debate. Boris Johnson hadn't. She reached out. He looked down.

YouGov has been polling people who watched the debate for the Times. Here are the results.

YouGov found that leave won the debate - although the same respondents are more likely to vote remain (marginally).

It also found that Boris Johnson was judged to have done best, followed by Ruth Davidson. (Commentators are praising Davidson more highly, but that is because she came into to the debate as something of an unknown quantity to many journalists, whereas we all know that Johnson can perform well on a stage like this.)

Worryingly for remain, YouGov also found the don’t knows breaking for leave.

Exc: YouGov Times debate jury resultscoming up: 1,176 respondents, 45% previously said they were remain, 45% previously leave, 10% DK

Times / YouGov results:Which side won ?Remain: 34%Leave: 39%Not sure:17%How will you voteRemain 41%Leave 40%Not sure 8%

Times / YouGov BBC Debate panel Who performed best (choose 3)Johnson 23%Davidson 22%Stuart 19%Khan 19%Leadsom 14%O'Grady 5%

Times / YouGov BBC DebateWhat do don't knows think(*tiny* sample of 115)Who won?R 38%L 45%DK 17%How will u voteR 11%L 16%DK 73%

This is what political journalists and commentators are saying about the debate on Twitter.

No one seems to think either side “won” decisively, but Ruth Davidson and (to a lesser extent) Sadiq Khan have done a lot for their own personal rankings in the political league tables.

From the New Statesman’s George Eaton

Sadiq and Ruth give Remain the punch it has lacked - my take on #BBCDebate https://t.co/pWECX0zih9 pic.twitter.com/hkEKzP2k1e

From the Guardian’s Patrick Wintour

Ruth Davidson helped save Cameron in Scottish referendum in 2014 and may have done same with EU referendum. Passion finally found.

From the Spectator’s James Forsyth

Thought tonight's debate was a score draw. At this stage of the campaign, that suits Remain

From the Independent’s John Rentoul

Ruth Davidson and Sadiq Khan the winners of tonight's BBC debate @indyvoices https://t.co/pWan2G3LOZ

From the Sunday Times’s James Lyons

Ruth Davidson having a stormer - not that that is news anymore #BBCDebate

From ITV’s Robert Peston

I'm hopeless judge of these things but @RuthDavidsonMSP and @SadiqKhan seem to be the Bale of this contest

Although Remain arguments same-old same-old, they sound new from new cast. Leave prob made error in fielding same cast as ITV debate

From the Sunday Times’s David Smith

Sadiq Khan very good, well supported by Frances O'Grady and Ruth Davidson.,Andrea Leadsom going down like a lead balloon.

From the Times’s Patrick Kidd

Sigh... Ruth Davidson is so good. Surely a by-election can be arranged before long

I know plenty of people hate him, but Boris actually did very well there.

From the Sun’s Tom Newton Dunn

Tough to call who won #BBCDebate, more like slow motion pantomine. Boris/Leave had the better rhetoric, but Ruth/Remain planted more doubt.

From the Economist’s Jeremy Cliffe

Great final statement from @RuthDavidsonMSP. Boris weirdly peripheral: like a one-man Statler & Waldorf with worse hair. #BBCDebate

From Huffington Post’s Paul Waugh

Boris has done well tonight, Gisela too. But Sadiq and Ruth D have finally made voting Remain seem like a passionate choice #BBCDebate

Boris still by far the star of Leave. Remain underestimate him at their peril. Just imagine what Leave wdve looked like without him.

Boris has a corker of a payoff line "This Thursday could be our independence day!" #BBCDebate [let's just hope it's better than the movie]

From the Mail on Sunday’s Dan Hodges

Thought final speeches framed problem for Leave. Boris rallying cry will inspire Brexit supporters. But Davidson will have reached waverers.

From ITV’s Alastair Stewart

#BBCDebate A consensus appears to be developing that tonight may not resolve #EUref but it may settle the Tory succession, as and when......

From Channel 4 News’s Krishnan Guru-Murthy

Funny seeing who gets the praise. Ruth Davidson and Sadiq Khan vying for Remain award. Boris undisputed champion of Leave. #BBCDebate

Overall #BBCDebate format proved bigger is not better. More heat than either light or depth.

From the Daily Mail’s Quentin Letts

Beeb Wembley stunt went unexpectedly well for Leavers, I'd say. But what a firing squad of shouty soundbites. Reithian values on acid.

From the Sunday Times’s Tim Shipman

This would have been more bearable if anyone saying "take back control" was given an immediate electric shock to the genitals

The fact that Remain don't have a pithy phrase like "take back control" is a massive problem for them

If nothing else has happened I this campaign, Boris Johnson has learned to do serious, deliver a line and read an autocue.

From the BBC’s Andrew Neil

Ruth Davidson making this a real blue-on-blue fest. Clearly loathes Boris and says Andrea Leadsom lying (as opposed to wrong).

From the BBC’s Philip Sim

Seems like barring a late goal, the #BBCDebate is going to finish a score draw, which is exactly what we've just missed on the other channel

From Sky’s Beth Rigby

It felt in earlier debates that #VoteLeave had all the passion but Davidson/Khan/Lucas really injected some verve into the #BBCDebate

From LBC’s Iain Dale

My ranking from the debate tonight...1. Andrea Leadsom2. Ruth Davidson3. Sadiq Khan4. Boris Johnson5. Gisela Stuart6. Frances O'Grady

Lord Sugar, the former Labour peer and newly appointed government enterprise tsar, is getting criticised for posting this on Twitter.

I find it strange that Gisela Gschaider a 1974 immigrant from Germany is on the brexit panel telling us British what we should do .

This is from the Mail’s Matt Dathan.

Sadiq Khan's team confirm he hasn't eaten or drank for 19 hours (Ramadan). I would love to watch Boris debate under the same circumstances!

And this is from the Sun’s Steve Hawkes.

William Hill twice shortened the odds on Ruth Davidson succeeding David Cameron during the debate - 33/1 to 25/1, then onto 16/1

According to the Sun’s Tom Newton Dunn, the spin room got lively.

Pretty massive impromptu dust up ongoing now in #BBCDebate spin room between Michael Gove and Will Straw. pic.twitter.com/W9Uh3LIeYH

And here is the Vote Leave chief executive, Matthew Elliott, on the debate.

The in campaign had nothing positive to contribute tonight – just like they’ve failed to make a positive contribution during the whole campaign. They’ve lost the economic argument, they don’t want to spend the £350m we send to Brussels every week on our priorities, and can’t explain how we can ever control immigration from inside the EU. They couldn’t even be honest about how many laws in this country come from Brussels. The public will have a choice on Thursday: they can choose project fear and vote in or they can chose project hope and take back control of their money and their borders. A Vote to Leave on Thursday is a vote for democracy.

(So Vote Leave have not entirely give up on the £350m. See 10.10pm.)

Here is the Britain Stronger in Europe take on tonight’s debate. This is from the briefing they have sent to journalists.

Tonight the leave campaign blew their last chance to show they have a plan for Britain’s future:

· The leave campaign have no plan for the future of our economy, because they couldn’t guarantee jobs, said it would take “ten years” to do a new trade deal with the EU, and couldn’t name a single country who would do a trade deal with the UK outside the EU.

· The leave campaign have no plan for the future of immigration, because they were unable to say they would reduce numbers.

· The leave campaign have no plan for our national security, as Ruth Davidson demolished their case by outlining the experts who back remain and leave campaigners failed to name a country who backed their stance.

The only really reliable way to assess who has “won” a debate is to find a representative panel and poll them, but even then people are likely to side with the politicians they supported before it started, and so really you need to find a panel of neutrals. And if a panel of neutrals had watched that? Most likely, they would have ended up as confused as ever.

What was striking, though, was how leave has managed to get to the end of the campaign, with expert economic opinion almost unanimous in saying Brexit would harm the economy and no one having the first idea what post-Brexit trading relationships would look like, and this not being a fatal handicap in a debate of this kind. The format helped tonight, because the participants were not subjected to forensic questioning, but somehow leave have managed to brush aside all the doubts with breezy optimism. It is not a feat that many people could pull off, but Boris Johnson manages it and for him tonight must rank as a success. Gisela Stuart and Andrea Leadsom were fine too. I found the endless mother/grandmother references a bit much, but I suspect for many viewers they were mildly reassuring.

Remain were underpowered on the economy, and struggling on immigration, but if debates of this kind are judged by how people see them on the TV news - and for most people that is how they are judged - then they have probably done better than my early snap summaries imply. Sadiq Khan and Ruth Davidson are veterans of mayoral/Scottish debates, but have never been tested on a prime ministerial platform of this kind, and they both acquitted themselves well. Good speakers use lists to make rhetorical points, and Khan and Davidson came pre-prepared with powerful zingers. It was uncanny to hear Khan sound just like David Cameron at one point, but Cameron is generally an effective communicator and Khan is not precious about lifting a good line. Khan and Davidson also challenged Johnson robustly, although it was noticeable that neither of them tried accusing him of opportunism (perhaps a recognition that the Amber Rudd/Angela Eagle/Nicola Sturgeon attacks like this in the ITV debate failed). Frances O’Grady was less flamboyant, but no less impressive, and tonight she may have done more to improve the reputation of trade unionists than anyone has done for years.

One final point: did you notice that there was almost no mention of the £350m that Vote Leave claim we send to the EU every week? That figure has been widely denounced as untrue, but for weeks Vote Leave defended it. Perhaps it has finally become discredited? Or perhaps it has been grounded because its task is done?

