The Rock of remain: why Gibraltar is rejecting Brexit

2016-06-16

For the remain camp, these are numbers dreams are made of: 85% of people saying they are sure to vote in the referendum, and 88% wanting Britain to stay in the EU. They are no dream, though: according to one recent poll, this is how the small British overseas territory of Gibraltar feels about Brexit.

“There is quite unprecedented unity here,” said Fabian Picardo, Gibraltar’s first minister. “Myself and all my predecessors, every political party, all the trade unions and employers’ organisations, every club, society and association … For Gibraltar, this is a slam dunk decision.”

Perched on the southern tip of Spain, the Rock and its 32,000 residents view Britain’s EU referendum with trepidation: their thriving economy, built around financial services and the port, is based on access to Europe’s single market – and Brexit could reignite a centuries-old sovereignty row with Spain.

Operators regulated and licensed in Gibraltar can sell financial services across the EU without need of further national approval, known as “passporting”, in the same way as firms based in London. This has helped the territory’s economy post double-digit economic growth, even through the euro crisis.

“Now that the leave camp has made it clear that they are not looking for Britain to remain a part of the European single market, the choice for Gibraltar has become very stark,” Picardo – speaking in his capacity as leader of the Gibraltar Socialist Labour party – said in a phone interview.

“Now we know that leaving the EU will also mean leaving the single market. For Gibraltar, that means the difference between a market of 32,000 people and a market of 520 million people.”

On those terms, he said, Brexit represented an existential threat to the territory’s economy. “It would require more than a repositioning,” Picardo said. “It would require a whole new economic model. That’s why so many here – barring perhaps a few individuals – will vote remain.”

But Brexit poses another threat to Gibraltar. Spain, which has wanted the territory back under its control pretty much since the Rock was first ceded to Britain in 1713, could make life considerably more difficult for Gibraltarians if British voters choose to leave the EU on 23 June.

Gibraltar’s border crossing with Spain, its only land access to the continent, has long been a flashpoint. In 1969, during the Franco dictatorship, the border was closed, in effect stranding residents unless they used boats or planes. It was not fully re-opened until 1985, as part of Spain’s negotiations to join the EU.

In 2013, as part of a particularly bitter row over disputed waters, Spanish authorities radically intensified border checks at the crossing, creating traffic jams hours long and obliging the European commission to step in to resolve the crisis.

Spain’s current foreign minister, from the conservative Popular party, suggested last week that if Britain did leave the EU, shared Anglo-Spanish sovereignty might be a price worth paying by Gibraltar to allow it to keep its access to the single market.

José Manuel García-Margallo, who has made no secret of his desire to see Gibraltar back under Spanish rule, said that if Britain left the EU, “it is obvious that Gibraltar also leaves the EU, and won’t therefore have access to the single market”.

Solutions would “have to be found to allow Gibraltar to have a link with the EU”, García-Margallo told Spanish radio, reviving a plan for “shared sovereignty during an extended period of time” that more than 98% of Gibraltarians rejected in a referendum in November 2002.

Picardo said Gibraltar’s fate could hang on the results of Spain’s general election on 26 June as well as the outcome of the referendum three days earlier. The socialist PSOE party has said that whether Britain remains in Europe or not, Gibraltar must retain access to the single market and have a free-flowing border with Spain.

“They see how important it is for Gibraltar to remain the economic motor for the whole region around it,” Picardo said, noting that as well as the jobs of 10,000 Spanish nationals who crossed the border every day to work on the Rock, nearly 25% of all jobs in the surrounding Campo de Gibraltar area of Spain depended on Gibraltar’s economy.

The Popular party, however, which is running Spain in a caretaker capacity until the 26 June election, being rerun following inconclusive results last December, is “basically saying access to the single market might be possible, but that the price would be not tariffs, but shared sovereignty over Gibraltar”, Picardo said.

“That is not going to happen, I’m afraid. I’m on the record that [García-Margallo] can put that suggestion in his autobiography – or anywhere else where the sun don’t shine.”

