EU referendum: our panel on Question Time at Wembley Arena

2016-06-22

Gaby Hinsliff: ‘Some detoxifying of the brand was in order’

MAKE SOME NOISE, LONDON! OK, David Dimbleby didn’t quite say that, but he surely wanted to. After all these years of Question Time playing draughty church halls in Lincolnshire, suddenly it was facing a 10,000-strong crowd at Wembley Arena, whipped up into an unlikely frenzy over the EU. Who says nobody cares about this referendum, eh?

After a seemingly endless series of debates, lessons had clearly been learned. Remain’s great weakness has been appearing remote and elitist, hence the inclusion of the TUC’s Frances O’Grady on the team – and she played a blinder. “If you don’t believe the experts, listen to the shop floor,” she cried, hammering home again and again that she was speaking for the workers, for people who couldn’t afford to take a risk on Brexit; people she’s been speaking for all her life.

For the leave team, meanwhile – a slightly chastened Boris Johnson, sandwiched sternly between Labour’s Gisela Stuart and the Tories’ Andrea Leadsom – some detoxifying of the brand was in order. Boris announced innocently that he was here to “celebrate” immigration – although mainly, it transpired, by vowing to reduce it. For who doesn’t want less of things they really value, eh? Over to a fired-up Sadiq Khan for remain, who got the biggest roar of the first half by describing the leave campaign as not project fear but “project hate”. A win on the facts for remain, perhaps – but with the caveat that in large parts of the country, leave is tapping feelings too deep to be explained away.

There were two storylines unfolding all night, as there have been throughout this referendum; one about our future in Europe, and one about the fate of David Cameron. All eyes have been on the ambitious Boris Johnson there, but this was a first chance for the Scottish Tory leader Ruth Davidson to show southern voters what she can do and she grabbed it with both hands, repeatedly tossing Boris’s inconsistencies and exaggerations back at him.

“It’s not the Boris show,” she observed scornfully at one point. To be honest, it’s nearly always the Boris show. But tonight was a reminder that it may not always be the only show in town.

Matthew d’Ancona: ‘Leave cannot afford to be seen as the gentrified face of bigotry’

Remember when Boris stood outside his house in February and pledged: “What I won’t do is take part in loads of blooming TV debates against other members of my party”? Yet here he was, two days before the referendum, face-to-face with a remain team that included none other than the Scottish Tory leader, Ruth Davidson. Well, I’m sure he meant it when he said it.

The former London mayor is a natural tribune, but he had his work cut out this evening at Wembley Arena against Davidson, one of the Tory party’s most engaging ambassadors to the Planet Earth, and Sadiq Khan, still fizzing with the energy of his victory in May’s mayoral contest.

“A slogan is not a detailed plan,” said Khan, a rhetorical punch that landed (in spite of being, in itself, a slogan rather than a detailed plan). David Dimbleby tried to rein-in his fellow member of the Bullingdon Club when his answers overran. But Khan and Davidson were more effective in their pincer movement. Johnson was supported by the Labour MP, Gisela Stuart, and Andrea Leadsom, minister of state for energy since the election. But the remain team concentrated its fire almost exclusively on the leave camp’s superstar general.

“Boris, you should know better,” the mayor said to his predecessor, more in sorrow than in anger. Then he accused leave of masterminding “project hate” in its handling of immigration – the strong insinuation being that Johnson and Michael Gove might disown Nigel Farage’s deplorable “Breaking Point” poster, but were surreptitiously happy to harvest any votes it yielded. This was risky terrain, of course. But Khan was at his most confident when listing the groups of EU migrants who contribute to British public services – and thanking them.

Whether or not Gladys Bramall, who has given £600,000 to leave, was a member of the BNP by choice, or simply because her husband signed her up, is a question that hovered over tonight’s debate and will haunt what is left of the campaign. Leave cannot afford to be seen as the gentrified face of bigotry.

Nor should it imply that the EU is about to welcome Turkey into the fold when this is simply not the case. This “big, fat lie”, as Khan called it, is starting to rebound on the Brexiteers. So it should. And every little helps from now on. As the campaign turns the last bend, this was no less than a pageant of a photo-finish ending.

Tom Clark: ‘A Freudian slip betrayed a Thatcherite vision’

There was none of the flattering of the questioners, the technique perfected by Nick Clegg in the 2010 debates. (“Angela, thank you so much: you are asking an excellent question ... ”). Hours before Britain’s fate is sealed, the stakes are too high, and both the leavers and remainers ignored the questioners, and often the question too, and hammered home pre-cooked lines.

On the economic turf, where expert endorsements should make life easy for remain, we saw that prevailing in a “debate” does not necessarily require any analytical support. Boris Johnson had JCB and Sir James Dyson on the side of Brexit, and he used them to swipe aside the great majority of business leaders. Gisela Stuart – a Labour leaver, whose German accent makes her an even rarer breed – said small businesses should vote out because they lacked the resources to lobby like the corporates did. Andrea Leadsom – whose real-world accent is a useful antidote to Johnson’s – sounded level-headed enough, although at one moment a Freudian slip betrayed a Thatcherite vision. An independent Britain, she said, could have “child-free taxcare”.

For remain, Frances O’Grady focused squarely on workplace rights. Sadiq Khan and Ruth Davidson were more pugilistic, Khan damning leave’s “project hate” on immigration, and Ruth Davidson bunching all the unanswered financial questions – the replacement for the single market, the imaginary new jobs, the response to the post-Brexit crisis – into rhetorical threes.

Johnson brushed it all away with the swaggering sigh, “there they go again”, a borrow from Ronald Reagan, a politician who turned his simpleton status to his advantage, in a premonition of the leavers’ disdain for “the experts”. To the viewer paying half-attention, as entertainment, the leavers won the night. The hope of the remainers must be that the voters may nonetheless wake up in the night, and distil their dull list of nagging questions into Davidson’s pithy peroration: Why take the risk?

