I challenged Michael Gove because Brexit flies in the face of true British values

2016-06-16

I am “that” woman, the “wolf in sheep’s clothing” one, she who dared to say: the emperor is wearing no clothes. I am the woman who dared to challenge the truth and morality behind Michael Gove’s rhetoric on Question Time last night.

I was at the Albert Hall in Nottingham because I believe passionately in making the right choice on 23 June: that choice, the most important decision for the future of our country and of Europe. It is also the global message we will send to the rest of the world.

This is what I said to Gove: “So much of what you say sounds incredibly plausible, but I can’t help sitting here thinking that you’re a wolf in sheep’s clothing, that this decision to leave has so many consequences we’re not talking about: the geopolitical issues, isolating the UK, the knock-on effect to Europe …

“What’s going to happen with Greece? What will happen to other countries? This decision goes against the heart of what us British, I think, believe in – in collaboration and joining together.”

I believe there are some inconvenient truths that Gove and the leave campaign appear to be ignoring. That fundamentally, success, strength and positive wellbeing of populations are built on good, strong, collaborative relationships and unions. Whether they be business-led, among friends and family or between nations, the bedrock of future success is held in partnership and cooperation, not separation.

Gove responded by saying that by leaving we would affirm our faith in democracy, and that the way we will help international cooperation “is by saying we believe that Britain stronger, freer and fairer can be a progressive beacon for the whole world”.

Really, Gove? A “progressive” beacon is not one I recognise as being responsible for leading a singular, narrow-minded and potentially devastating result for this country and our allies in Europe. This is a dangerous and hugely speculative beacon.

Gove is a skilled orator but what he presents as truth and fact, he fails to say is speculative

Gove seemed rattled by what I said. It wasn’t a great note, from his perspective, for the discussion to end on, but an important one for myself and for those who share my view.

I’d done my homework, and so much of what Gove said just doesn’t stand up to closer scrutiny. The world is getting smaller. Having international allies and unity is critical amid the geopolitical challenges we face. Europe as a union has kept us safe for decades, an infinitely valuable and indisputable fact that is being ignored by the leave campaign.

When we have issues in business, we don’t walk away. We resolve those issues and recognise that we will be stronger through the process of resolution, and that “together” is immeasurably more powerful than “alone”.

There are many highly digestible summaries of consequence by the financial and economic powerhouses, who without exception tell us leaving the EU is an extremely bad idea.

Another audience member challenged Gove’s belief in, and case for, Britain being better off economically by asking: “How can you actually say that you believe we’re going to be better off when the majority of experts are telling you completely different?”

David Dimbleby backed up the challenge but the response was unspecific. There was a constant plea to “take back control” and be “proud” to walk away. I’m already proud – proud to be British and proud to be European.

Alongside the financial and economic implications, though – which Gove describes as “bumps in the road” – we also have a responsibility that is harder to make tangible: our responsibility, as a strong economic nation, to humanity. We have a responsibility towards those living here in the UK, and also for the lives of those in Europe who will be affected, by what we decide, My own message may appear simple, but it represents the heart of our culture.

Overall, the reaction of the audience was courteous, but also feisty. It is fair to say, I think, that those who attended felt privileged to have the opportunity to speak freely and democratically.

Gove is a skilled orator. But what he presents as truth and fact, he fails to say is speculative, and to add that there are no guarantees. This “grass is greener” perspective resonates, but is it being taken to heart? I hope not, because all too quickly the wolf in sheep’s clothing that is leave will be with us, and there will be no emergency exit.

