European neighbours want Britain to remain – but only just

2016-06-20

As Britain has grown ever more anxious and divided over its future in or outside the European Union, the European public remains surprisingly relaxed about the prospect of a Brexit, a new survey shows.

The survey of 10,992 European citizens, carried out by Germany’s Bertelsmann Foundation, shows that while a majority of continental Europeans across all age groups are in favour of Britain remaining a member of the EU, the support is not overwhelmingly high, at 54%.

A majority of Europeans in all 28 member states said they believed that Britain’s departure would have little or no impact on their own country, with only 25% expressing the view that their country would be worse off.

While the survey was carried out in April, and thus before the Brexit question came to dominate the media agenda in many countries, recent comments by high-profile continental politicians hint at a similar degree of sang-froid.

Austrian chancellor Christian Kern told the Guardian last week that he looked ahead to the referendum on 23 June “with a certain serenity” because he believed fundamental reforms were necessary whatever the outcome, while German finance minister Wolfgang Schäuble has commented that “Europe will also work without Britain if necessary”.

Bertelsmann project manager Isabell Hoffmann said: “What we have seen in our polling is that while the mood in the UK is incredibly agitated, the atmosphere on the continent has been relatively calm. The baseline response we are seeing is that people in the rest of Europe haven’t really been shaken up by the Brexit debate.”

The survey also suggests that justice secretary Michael Gove’s vision of a British exit from the European Union sparking “the democratic liberation of a whole continent” currently falls short of reality.

EU referendums on membership would produce majority remain votes in all of the six largest EU member states except the UK, the survey found. In France and Italy, the majority of those saying they would vote to remain in the EU is relatively slim at 52% and 54% respectively, while 62% of Germans and 74% of Spanish citizens surveyed said they would vote to stay in the EU.

The Bertelsmann survey paints a contrasting picture of continental attitudes towards the European Union to that conveyed in another study published earlier this month.

A survey by the Washington-based Pew Research Center showed a sharp decline in public support for the EU across its largest member states over the past year.

Only 38% of respondents in France said they had a favourable view of the EU, down 17 percentage points from last year. Support for the EU in Spain fell by 16 points to 47%, in Germany by eight points to 50%, and in Britain by seven points to 44%.

But on the question of EU integration, both studies hint at more positive attitudes than one might expect. Bertelsmann found a majority of 59% saying they would prefer more political and economic integration, and only 24% saying they preferred less.

The UK is an outlier in this respect, with only 31% saying they would like to see more integration, compared with 59% in Germany, 71% in Italy and 78% in Spain.

Pew’s study – Euroscepticism beyond Brexit – found the view that “some powers should be returned to national governments” to be a minority position in all countries surveyed apart from Greece and the UK. In all other member states, a majority said that the current division of powers should remain the same or that more powers should be transferred to the EU.

