Scotland’s Europhilia stands between Cameron and catastrophe

2016-06-18

Inners still lead outers amongst Scottish voters, with markedly different attitudes towards immigration and the continent than those south of the border




f David Cameron 

He won’t owe victory 

Opinion polls show that, though Remain’s majority in Scotland is shrinking, inners still lead outers among those likely to vote by 25%. In the UK as a whole, on the other hand, outers were leading this week by as much as 7%. To put the question crudely, why does 

An obvious answer is attitudes to 

But is a host population more tolerant of outsiders the fewer of them there are? Personal experience suggests the opposite may be the case: nobody in London ever suggested that an Indian friend of mine went “back to the trees”, but it came easily to the lips of a few local boys in the Scottish village I’d grown up in when I took her there 35 years ago; and, with every respect to English country life, a non-white individual is hardly likely to have an easier time of it in Norfolk than in Hackney.

It might be truer to say that immigration has made less of an impact in Scotland because it can be portrayed as a phenomenon or problem belonging to another country, with its roots in an empire in which Scotland, with a helpful amnesia, forgets it played a significant role. Suppressing or being ignorant of imperial history, rejecting the union flag, a Scot can present himself to an Indian, say, as a fellow victim of big bully England. The lie has one good result: it frees an individual from an awkward passage in his national history. For those still acting this memory out, see the 

Then there are the newspapers. In Scotland, the London dailies and weeklies sell far more copies than their indigenous rivals – the Scottish edition of the Sun has the biggest circulation of all – but their power to shape the national conversation seems far weaker. “The Daily Mail reader” and “the Sun reader” are sociopolitical archetypes that belong south of the border. The Scottish editions of these newspapers tend to be watchful of a mainstream public opinion that they have played no part in creating, and sometimes even timorous towards it. “

Other than in fishing and parts of the farming industry Brussels has never been successfully presented as a bogeyman in Scotland, thanks in part to the pre-existing bogeyman of London. It can even be argued that Scottish nationalism needed the EU to turn it into a successful movement, on the grounds that the “independent within Europe” policy, promoted by the SNP MP Jim Sillars in the late 1980s, made separation from the UK a less scary proposition and nationalists more electable. (Sillars himself is now one of 

But there are deeper elements at work here, dating from pre-union times when England’s continental enemies made Scotland a convenient friend, giving rise to the idea that Scotland has always been more “European” than England in its attitudes. Red pantile roofs from the Netherlands; the Scots word “ashet” meaning plate, from the French 

Finally, there is Robert Burns. In an 

Certainly, the consequences have been bad and good. On the one hand, an occasional outbreak of intolerable moral smugness; on the other, fans of the national football side who, when they lurch down foreign streets want, like drunken labradors, only to be liked. “That Man to Man, the world o’er, Shall brothers be for a’ that” is a sentiment that informs Scotland’s predilection for the EU. Who could have guessed it might save Cameron’s career, to say nothing of the UK’s future?

