For women of colour, the EU equals hope

2016-06-22

Letters




The EU referendum debate has brought rage, despair, hope, confusion and fear. As women of colour, we put our names to this letter for many reasons. Like millions of ordinary Brits, we care about our country and its peoples. We care about our children’s future. We honour our country’s past. We know we must be present today. There is no opting out. Equally important, we want our voices heard.

Too much of this debate has been monopolised by a mono-chatter of white men in suits. Understandable at one level, unacceptable at another. With black and minority ethnic people making up 16% of our population, there are no excuses for the lack of plurality of voices in the mainstream media. We have a responsibility to the next generation to say we stood up and were counted. How else can we expect them to be fearless when they face challenges?

It is not our words we want the next generation to hear. It is our actions we want them to see. It is the belief that anything is possible. We live with the anger one feels at a political system that is fractured, of being left behind. We know that inequality, injustice and insecurity hit the poorest hardest.

We recognise the EU is far from perfect. We also know that paid holiday, parental leave, anti-discrimination measures, safety in the workplace and equal pay are all protected by EU legislation. The EU integration fund provides financial support to fight against racism and xenophobia, and the European structural fund invests in regional projects that don’t have the hothouse pressure of Westminster. For that we are grateful, for it allows creativity to blossom in the inner-city deserts where many of our communities live.

We urge all our communities to vote remain on 23 June. As a gesture of hope; as a commitment to the next generation; as recognition of the honourable men and women who fought for peace across Europe’s soil; as an action to look outwards, not inwards; for the belief that fear will not win and hatred is not perpetrated in our name.

 

 

 

