Marine Le Pen: do not speculate about Jo Cox's killing

2016-06-17

French far-right leader says it would be indecent to jump to conclusions about the dramatic death of the British MP

 in Paris and Associated Press in Vienna




, leader of France’s far-right Front National, has cautioned against speculation that the 

Le Pen said it was “not very decent to use this dramatic event” for speculation.

Two early lines of inquiry by the police investigating Cox’s murder in West Yorkshire are understood to be the 52-year-old suspect’s links to far-right groups and his mental health.

Le Pen spoke at a meeting in Vienna of rightwing and Eurosceptic parties convened under the motto “patriotic spring”. 

She spoke alongside Heinz-Christian Strache, leader of the far-right Austrian Freedom party (FPÖ) whose candidate 

In a speech at the meeting, Le Pen said support for Brexit in the UK was one sign of a “new air” of patriotism sweeping 

She argued that alongside Hofer’s large score in the Austrian presidential election and the FN’s rise in 

She said people across Europe had been “stuck for too long in a fatalism imposed by their disconnected or cynical elite” and the EU created “confusion, disorder and conflict” on all topics and caused “chaos and destruction everywhere”.”.

She added: “To keep their citizens submissive, discredited elites play on fears that are more and more exaggerated … They promise the British the worst catastrophes imaginable if they leave the EU – even the air quality is supposed to depend on it.”

Le Pen has seized on the UK’s 

Le Pen deliberately did not come to the UK to campaign for Brexit, despite 

Le Pen is running again for the French presidency next year and polls suggest she could make a strong showing.

When asked about Cox’s murder, Nicolas Bay, the Front National’s general secretary, told French TV: “It’s clearly hard to have an explanation. It’s a dramatic event and our thoughts are first with her family and children. For the rest, I think it’s the investigation that will tell us things and above all it’s important to hold back from any use of it for political purposes.”

 

