BBC tops poll as most important news source for EU referendum

2016-06-22

The BBC has been the most important source of information for voters about the EU referendum, according to a poll conducted for the Electoral Reform Society (ERS).

The survey found that 34% of the public believed the BBC’s coverage was the key source in helping them reach their voting decision compared to 20% who named newspapers.

Family was ranked as a top factor by a further 18%; friends by 16%; and social media, also by 16%. Interestingly, 17% named the Leave campaign compared to just 9% who listed the Remain campaign.

People were asked by the polling company, BMG Research, to name their three main sources for information. And a closer look at the results reveals stark demographic divides among the sample of respondents.

Only 24% of 18-24 year olds viewed the BBC as one of their most important sources of information about the referendum compared to 41% of over 65s.

And almost double the proportion of over 65s (29%) said newspapers were their most important source of information as against 16% of 18-24 year olds.

Meanwhile, 25% of over 65s viewed the Leave campaign as their most important source of information compared to 13% of 18-24 year olds.

Social media scored highly with 18-24 year olds (33%) but only 8% of over 65s listed it as a main source.

There was also a clear gender gap. Women were far more likely to trust family on the EU: 23% of women named family as a crucial information point compared to just 13% of men.

As for party allegiance, people who said they were Conservatives were more likely to rely on newspapers – 25% of Conservative supporters to 20% of Labour backers. By contrast, Labour supporters relied much more on social media – 23% to the Tories’ 13%.

One stand-out figure: 48% of Ukip supportets said the Leave campaign was their main source of referendum information and just 25% of them trusted the BBC making.

Katie Ghose, the ERS chief executive, said: “While it’s great that people are getting their information about the EU from a variety of sources... it’s crucial that voters get the facts and opinions from both sides to help them reach an informed decision.

“The debate has been incredibly negative and left many still searching for answers to fundamental questions about the UK’s relationship with the EU.”

She recommended the ERS’s Better Referendum tool as a factual guide. In separate research, the ERS found that one in six people had not been contacted about the referendum.

