Jeremy Corbyn to issue pro-EU rallying cry to wavering Labour voters

2016-06-21

Labour leader will tell supporters that voting to leave EU in referendum would risk economic recovery and workers’ rights




Jeremy Corbyn is to launch a call for Britain to remain in the European Union amid concerns that Labour’s traditional supporters could vote to leave in the referendum on Thursday. As the campaign enters its final two days, the Labour leader will tell supporters that leaving the EU would put Britain’s 

The rallying cry to party members comes after criticisms from some on the remain side that Corbyn has been lukewarm in his commitment to the campaign. The leave camp has privately revealed that it has gained the backing 

Corbyn will appear on Tuesday in Manchester alongside the former home secretary Alan Johnson, the 

In some his most pro-EU comments yet, Corbyn will say: “On 23 June we are faced with a choice: do we remain to protect jobs and prosperity in Britain that depend on trade with 

“A vote for remain is a vote to put our economy first. On Thursday, join me in voting remain to protect jobs and rights at work.”

His intervention is part of a day of action for senior 

At a question and answer session on Sky News on Monday, Corbyn again expressed his reservations about the EU, but argued that voters should choose to stay in it. He said the EU must change “dramatically” if Britain remains a member following the vote. “It’s a big decision. If we stay in Europe, there are implications; if we leave Europe, there are massive implications,” he said.

“But it is also a turning point, because if we leave, I don’t think there is an easy way back. If we remain, I believe Europe has got to change quite dramatically to something much more democratic, much more accountable, and share our wealth and improve our living standards, and our working conditions, all across the whole continent. 

“I’m not a lover of the 

When asked if he would shoulder some of the blame in the event of a vote to leave, Corbyn replied: “I’m not going to take blame for people’s decisions. There will be a decision made on Thursday. I’m hoping there is going to be a remain vote; there may well be a remain vote, there may well be a leave vote.” 

Told that he did not sound “too keen” on the EU, the Labour leader replied: “Whatever the result, we have got to work with it.”

In a further development, Len McCluskey 

“In the last 10 years, there has been a gigantic experiment at the expense of ordinary workers. Countries with vast historical differences in wage rates and living standards have been brought together in a common labour market,” he said. “The result has been sustained pressure on living standards, a systematic attempt to hold down wages, and to cut the costs of social provision for working people.”

On Sunday, 

In a further sign of tensions on the remain side, Alan Johnson has conceded that the campaign is “struggling” with some serious challenges. During the 

The former home secretary said this was the dynamic “as soon as the [second quarter] immigration statistics came out, and we’re still struggling with the after-effects of that”.

