EU referendum: how pro-Europe Labour red-tops argue their case

2016-06-19

With four days to go before the EU referendum, the Sunday newspapers revealed where they stand, and how they hope their readers will vote.

Although there were no real surprises, the leading articles in two titles - the Sunday Mirror and Sunday People - were fascinating. Let’s begin, however, with the papers that acted as anticipated.

The Mail on Sunday, having hinted heavily over several weeks that it would not take the Brexit line advocated by the Daily Mail, urged remain “for a safer, freer, more prosperous and yes, an even Greater Britain.”

There was never any doubt that the Observer would also go for remain, saying that we must be part of the EU to be an “international, liberal and open Britain.”

The Sun on Sunday’s unequivocal call for Brexit - to free Britain “from the stranglehold of the EU superstate” - was also to be expected (coming days after its daily title did the same).

And no bookie would have offered odds on what the Sunday Express would say. In company with its daily title, it has been campaigning for leave for years. In a full-page leader, it urged readers “to seize the opportunity and vote wisely to leave the European Union.”

With the Times having plumped for remain, some people might have thought the Sunday Times would follow suit. But it followed the logic of Eurosceptic arguments it has made down the years, about “the onward march of the centralising European project”, by urging leave.

And the Sunday Telegraph did likewise. “On balance,” it supported leaving the European Union: an “optimistic and hopeful” move as we arrive “at a crossroads in our history” in which “the EU belongs to the past.”

But the really fascinating leading articles were those in the Sunday Mirror and Sunday People, two traditional Labour-supporting pro-EU red-top newspapers.

The editors of these papers are aware that there is something of a disconnect between their championing of the European project and their readers’ scepticism.

Gradually, over a number of years, the majority of their readers - drawn in the main from an ageing white working class - have grown disenchanted with the EU.

So how would they face up to the dilemma? The Sunday Mirror did not flinch. But it decided to couch its remain argument in terms of Britain’s post-war history rather than in the present.

It went back to that period in the late 1940s and early 50s when politicians in Germany and France were eager to secure a lasting peace by organising a European trade pact.

“The EU is not perfect,” it conceded, but Brexit threatens all the positive effects of European integration. “This referendum is not just about our previous history,” it said (having done just that), but “about making our own history”. So “make Thursday Victory in Europe Day.”

The People, by contrast, was not prepared to tell its audience what to do. “EU decide”, said the headline and, for what it’s worth, here’s our fence-sitting view.

It criticised prime minister David Cameron for making an hysterical case for remain rather than a balanced one. And it was not enthusiastic about Boris Johnson promising “economic nirvana outside Europe”.

Then it touched on the issue which has most exercised its audience, and probably the audiences of the Sunday Mirror, Sunday Express and Sun on Sunday: is immigration good or bad for Britain? The People said:

“What the argument whittles down to is whether you fear immigration more than the economic uncertainty of going it alone.

There is no question migrants are net contributors to the British economy. They pay £3bn in taxes and take out £500,000 in benefits. They give 6,000 times MORE than they receive. But that may cut no ice if your job, your school place, or your GP appointment has been taken by a migrant.”

The People did not say which of those positions it supported, however. Instead it continued with a line that favoured the remain side:

“We understand just how many of you feel discarded, disenfranchised and disenchanted. The EU is less than perfect but that should not be an excuse to diss it...

You may not feel you have a voice but you do have a vote... If you have decided how to cast it, all well and good. But as the final countdown begins if you are still uncertain then Brexit promises only more of that uncertainty. So if in doubt, don’t vote out.”

I can’t recall having analysed a Sunday People leading article in the past. But this one, on such a crucial vote, was genuinely interesting. It was a lesson in trying not to upset readers who will not do what the paper would really want them to do.

