Killing of Jo Cox puts fevered EU referendum debate into perspective

2016-06-17

Fatal attack on popular Labour MP brings temporary halt to campaigning just as it was becoming increasingly unpleasant

Contact author




Another major football championship and another outpouring of national grief when England failed to win their opening game. With minutes to go, the headlines had all been written. “Assured England advance ...” 

One of the drawbacks of following the EU referendum campaign closely is that you have to get used to politicians saying the same things over and over again. Even down to the same lame gags. I still haven’t quite worked out if it’s because they are too lazy to bother to rephrase even a subclause – they believe that voters are too stupid to understand more than one message, so they don’t want to risk saying anything that might confuse them – or because they genuinely find their own jokes hilarious. With Gordon Brown, I’m beginning to suspect the latter. After David Cameron and Jeremy Corbyn were distinctly underwhelming in presenting the case for remaining, the former Labour prime minister was brought out of retirement 

Sir – for the moment at least – Philip Green’s six-hour session before a joint business and work and pensions select committee was 

Say what you like about Michael Gove, at least he believes what he’s saying. Unlike Boris Johnson, who generally acts out of personal advantage, Mike is a proper zealot. Unfortunately, it turns out that not everything Mike believes is necessarily true. For years, Mike has had a burning resentment against the EU for putting his father’s Aberdeen fishing fleet out of business. He knows this because he is certain that he heard his father say this to him when he was a kid. It seems, however, that Mike might have got the wrong end of the stick and that what his Dad was actually saying was that, while he had no great love for the EU, he had 

One of the unexpected pleasures of having grown-up children is walking to the polling station with them to vote. Their enthusiasm to participate in the democratic process, their grasp of what’s at stake and, it has to be said, the knowledge that they are voting the right way, always gives me a thrill. On Thursday morning, when my son and I – my daughter was away in the US, but don’t worry, she will be back for the EU referendum – went off to 

