Long queues reported outside referendum polling stations

2016-06-23

Long queues have been reported outside some polling stations as voters cast their ballots in Britain’s closely fought EU referendum.

In London and parts of the south-east many were forced to brave torrential rain and navigated flooded streets to have their say.

David Cameron ignored questions about the weather, saying only “Good morning” as he and his wife Samantha cast their votes at Methodist Hall in Westminster.

The justice secretary, Michael Gove, who had already voted by post, accompanied his journalist wife Sarah Vine to their north Kensington polling station and declared himself “quite excited”.

The Ukip leader, Nigel Farage, speaking outside his Kent home, said he believed the leave camp had a “very strong chance” because of the weather, adding: “But it’s all about turnout and those soft remainers staying at home.”

The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, voting in his Islington constituency, smiled as he was asked if he was feeling confident. “Extremely. It’s a very good day,” he said. On the outcome, he joked: “You could either check the wind, or check the bookies.” He added: “The bookies usually get it right. I cost them a lot of money,” he added, referring to the very long odds on his party leadership chances.

The latest Ipsos Mori phone poll, completed in the days before the referendum, gave remain a four-point lead on 52% to leave on 48%. So far all the final phone polls have shown remain in the lead, while all but one of the final online polls have given the lead to leave.

Some polling stations were forced to close and relocate as the equivalent of one month’s rain fell overnight in the capital.

Kingston upon Thames council, in south-west London, relocated two polling stations in Chessington and New Malden. Local residents reported that polling stations in Barking and Newham in east London were difficult to access because of flood water.

The weather did not appear to have deterred the determined. Pictures posted on social media showed plenty of queues.

Queues like I've never seen out the polling station in hackney pic.twitter.com/oDUBM7wBVj

The Scilly Isles was racing Sunderland to be the first place to have a result. Usually election ballot boxes are taken to the mainland for counting. In this instance, the counting will be carried out on St Mary’s and with just 1,700 eligible voters should not take long.

Only two UK referendums have had higher turnouts than recent general elections, according to the Institute for Government: the one on the Good Friday agreement in Northern Ireland in 1998 (81.1%) and that on Scottish independence in 2014 (84.6%).

Can't wait?Scilly is aiming to be first in the UK to return the #referendum vote today We are racing Sunderland RT pic.twitter.com/zDOlO9cmFk

A record number of voters are eligible to take part in the referendum, with the Electoral Commission putting the number at 46,499,537.

Shares hit their highest level since late April. Sterling hit a 2016 high and world stocks climbed for a fifth day running.

The referendum was making the news beyond Britain. In China, the Global Times, published by the ruling Communist party’s official People’s Daily, warned that Britain could lose its global influence if it left the EU.

Germany’s Bild newspaper promised that if Britons voted to stay, Germans would not hog sun loungers and would recognise Geoff Hurst’s controversial extra-time goal in the 1966 World Cup final.

If Britain stays, @BILD will acknowledge the Wembley goal #EUref #Tomorrowspaperstoday @suttonnick pic.twitter.com/DPxHo0IbK9

