As a scientist, I know the immense value of collaboration. So I will vote Remain.

2016-06-16

Having seen at first hand how the European Union works, and the benefits that it delivers for science, society and our security, the choice on 23 June is clear

Anne Glover




y father-in-law, Charlie George, died last week. He was 98 and a very fine man; someone our country could be proud of. He fought in the second world war, and his memories of those desperate times remained vivid until the end. But the European Union changed all that; we’ve had peace in Europe for over seventy years by cementing our relationships through trade, cooperation and shared values. We all have a stake in the 

To paraphrase Monty Python, what has the EU ever done for us? For a start, we’ve created the world’s biggest single market for over 500 million people. We’ve introduced safety and environmental standards that all those who trade with us have to meet. EU citizens enjoy 

What is it among these progressive measures that the Brexiteers would wish to repeal? Such achievements cannot be delivered by small countries on their own. And in the UK, we benefit from every single one of them.

When did we become so sloppy in our thinking to believe that the pressures on our health or educational services, in a country of 65 million, are due to 330,000 immigrants a year, just over half of which are from the EU? The same immigrants who the Office of National Statistics tells us contribute more to our economy than they receive. We seem to be suffering from a mass delusion and we need to snap out of it soon.

I have benefited greatly from seeing the European Commission from the inside, having spent three years as 

In my own area, I have seen how 

So why are we now engaged in the most desperate display of shoddy, partial analysis of information? 

We have one week left to listen carefully to the full spectrum of evidence and choose what sort of future we want. For me the choice is clear. I want to live in a country I can be proud of, which is creative, imaginative and demonstrates global leadership, which values peace and stability in 

If the UK leaves, I fear that we condemn ourselves to irrelevant obscurity. As a scientist, I have seen at first-hand the value of European collaboration and the benefits it delivers. I also know 

 

