Northern Ireland’s greatest fear from a Brexit is the return to conflict

2016-06-21

Northern Ireland has had more than its fair share of problems over the years but a Brexit could be its toughest challenge to date. As polls suggest that leave and remain are neck and neck, the possibility of a post-Brexit Northern Ireland has to be seriously considered. And there is no good outcome.

Last week David Cameron confirmed that border controls would be necessary – either as a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic, or by way of checks at exit points between Northern Ireland and Great Britain. Either solution would be disastrous for the province.

Almost 20 years have passed since the Good Friday Agreement, and huge progress has been made in that time. Since our last referendum in 1998, Northern Ireland has enjoyed relative peace, and the province has flourished. The tourist industry is now worth £723m and the economy has been further boosted by the surprise emergence of the local film industry, which hosts the Game of Thrones cast and crew for six months of the year. The IT industry is also growing, and there are plans to attract even more private investment by bringing corporate tax down to 12.5%, in line with the Republic of Ireland.

Terrorism still exists across the province, and the paramilitaries are waiting to relaunch their bitter campaigns

The majority of this growth has been courtesy of the EU itself. Northern Ireland received almost £2.5bn in the last EU funding round, and a further £2bn is promised before 2020. The EU has also helped to create a number of cross-border programmes such as Intertrade, Peace and Tourism Ireland, all of which have been hugely successful in bringing together communities both north and south of the border. Today, Northern Ireland is more integrated than it has ever been – even if sectarian attacks and marching season riots haven’t been eliminated completely.

Yet given the emphasis on immigration during the referendum debates, border controls are likely to become a priority in the event of a Brexit vote. Whether these controls come in the form of airport checks or a Trump-style wall, the result will be equally alienating for a population still recovering from decades of division.

To install physical checkpoints along the border would instantly undermine a hard-won peace, and the psychological impact alone would be catastrophic. A return of those barricaded towers and armed checkpoints will stir up emotional memories for many Northern Irish people who witnessed years of violence in border towns such as Newry, Omagh and Derry, and there is a very real fear that they may lead to a resurgence of dissident activity.

Let’s not be naive – terrorism still exists across the province, and the paramilitaries are just waiting for an excuse to relaunch their bitter campaigns. Just last month, Theresa May raised the threat level from Northern Ireland to Great Britain from moderate to severe, and in the past few weeks there have been police raids on a number of secret arms stores. Perhaps this is why the latest polls show that Northern Irish voters will vote remain on 23 June. The risks are simply too high, and the province has come too far to allow this progress to be undone by a few checked boxes on a ballot paper.

Bizarrely, the DUP – Northern Ireland’s leading political party – has been aggressively campaigning for a leave vote, with first minister Arlene Foster brushing off fears of border restrictions. Even the Northern Ireland secretary, Theresa Villiers, has jumped on the leave bandwagon, without making any viable suggestions as to how a post-Brexit Northern Ireland would work. In the absence of a cohesive plan, Sinn Fein has already begun proposing a new referendum for the unification of Ireland – a move that has the potential to undo all the hard work of the peace process, regardless of the result.

For residents of Northern Ireland, the possibility of a return to conflict overshadows every other possible benefit or drawback of a Brexit. This vote could change everything, and the Northern Irish people will ultimately have very little say in the result.

With just over a million people eligible to vote, Northern Irish votes are unlikely to make much of a difference to the overall result. On Thursday, the future of Northern Ireland will essentially be decided by people who don’t live there. Great Britain may be able to weather a Brexit, but Northern Ireland simply cannot.

