EU vote: what your favourite supermarket reveals about your politics

2016-06-21

What colour is your shopping bag? According to a study, your favourite supermarket could be a proxy for your politics in the run-up to Thursday’s EU referendum, with well-heeled shoppers at Sainsbury’s heading towards Brexit and Tesco shoppers backing the status quo.

Your favourite supermarket is often considered a crude shorthand for status in class-obsessed Britain. In retail folklore, middle-class southerners carry the orange rosette that is a Sainsbury’s bag for life, while a bootful of heavy duty Tesco carriers points to a more workmanlike existence. Northern brands Asda and Morrisons, meanwhile, are proud of their working-class appeal.

A study by Verdict Retail found Tesco shoppers were the most likely out of the big four supermarkets to support the EU, with 43% planning to vote to remain. Asda shoppers were also pro-Europe with nearly 40% in favour of staying in the single market.

The opposite is true in the aisles of Sainsbury’s and Morrisons, where Brexiters are in the ascendance. Two-fifths of Sainsbury’s shoppers are ready to turn their back on Europe. Customers at Bradford-based Morrisons are also keen to go to it alone, with 36.4% in favour of breaking away, although they were not asked if they also wanted independence for Yorkshire too.

Tesco shoppers’ support for Europe is heartwarming for its chief executive, Dave Lewis, who is pulling up the drawbridge at its Welwyn Garden City headquarters. He has indicated that its eastern European chains are not for sale but has already sold off its Turkish business, Kipa, and South Korean subsidiary, Homeplus.

German discounters Aldi and Lidl may have won over millions of shoppers with their rock bottom prices but it has not turned their cost conscious customers into Europhiles. The intentions of Aldi and Lidl shoppers, 40.4% and 38.8% respectively, showed they were likely to vote to leave the EU, according to the survey, although both chains had a higher than average number of shoppers who did not plan to vote at all.

