Jeremy Clarkson tells David Cameron 'my gut says stay in the EU'

2016-06-16

Jeremy Clarkson and James May have said that Britain remaining in the EU is one of only three things they agree on.

The former Top Gear presenters spoke as they met David Cameron in the west London office of their TV production company.

Clarkson said to the prime minister: “It’s an extraordinary thing that James and I only agree on three things, which is sandwich spread is delicious, the old Subaru Legacy Outback is a good car and Britain staying in.”

During the informal talk with Cameron over croissants and cappuccinos in Stronger In branded mugs, Clarkson added: “I have not, with the greatest of respect, heard one politician say anything that’s caused me to change my mind.

“There’s huge numbers that don’t understand and get confused. Really, it’s my gut.”

Clarkson has previously declared being in favour of remain, saying it would be “better to stay in and try to make the damn thing work properly”.

The presenter also said he felt there were “compelling” reasons for leaving but added: “They’re not compelling enough for me to say I want to drive a Morris Oxford, which is what would happen.”

May, meanwhile, said: “If I’m honest, it’s a gut feeling for me as well. There are too many people who think we will be all right, but that’s just not true.”

The pair discussed the effects of Brexit on the UK car industry and Cameron said manufacturers would face tariffs on exports to the continent in the event of a vote to leave.

He said: “I’ve spent a lot of time in different car plants in the last few years and if you look at Toyota, Nissan, Jaguar, Ford, they are all doing well in Britain.

“They are all expanding, they are all making more, they are all selling more and if we were out – like America was out and with a trade deal like them – they would actually face a tariff on every single car they send to Europe.”

Clarkson added that his fellow presenter Richard Hammond, who was filming in France for the trio’s Amazon Prime show, was still undecided. “He is a ‘don’t know’ – he does not actually know there’s a referendum on,” he joked.

