Preparing for Brexit? Voters stash the cash and hoard the holidays

2016-06-23

Britons have been panic-buying travel money, delaying property purchases and seeking citizenship of other European countries, amid fears that the EU referendum result might trigger sudden market and bureaucratic turmoil.

The prospect of sterling tumbling in the case of a Brexit vote sent some rushing to buy euros, while others booked holidays early to be on the safe side, Guardian readers have said.

The Post Office said its currency sales had surged by 74% year-on-year since the weekend with long queues of Britons eager to exchange their pounds.

“On Monday, I booked a week’s half-board holiday in Malta for this Christmas with [my] partner as we feared the cost could increase greatly if UK votes for Brexit,” said one reader from Worcestershire. “Also I have deferred the possibility of buying a small holiday apartment in another EU country as this will depend on what happens in the vote.”

Dave Kirby, from Cheshire, delayed a big house move until the outcome of the vote became clear. “I am not moving to France today because of the referendum,” he said. “I am pushing back plans to put my house in Britain on sale, and not booking hotels for a house hunting trip to France.”

Thousands have already applied for second passports, since the “threat” of Brexit first became real last summer. One reader talked this week of switching investments and seeing how easy it might be to become French. “I have researched applying for French citizenship and found out that the language test is not available next year,” the Bedford resident said. “I need to get a stack of paperwork together, but I am getting started. I have already switched investments from the UK to other parts of Europe. I did this in in January because I was already nervous about the result even then.”

Christopher Davies, from Leeds, has been stockpiling euros for months, but is more concerned about the human impact of a Brexit vote. “My partner and I have been planning a European road trip for months and have our ferry booked for late July. But I wonder what reception we will get on our travels, regardless of whether remain or leave wins.”

Not everyone has been trying to hold on to their cash. Some have been avidly giving it away to bookmakers. Betfair took £5m on the EU referendum on Thursday morning as punters rushed to place final bets. The biggest wager of the morning was £28,500 on a remain result. Ladbrokes reported bets of more than £1m in the past 24 hours, most of it on the remain side. Odds shortened on Wednesday night to around 1/7 – an 87.5% chance of a remain win.

