Why Northern Irish and Irish voters want to remain in the EU

2016-06-20

Over the past half a century the British-Irish relationship has evolved into a much more mutually respectful relationship after centuries of hurt. Despite still being haunted by the Troubles, progress has been shown in a lack of recrimination in this year’s Easter Rising centenary and by next month’s Somme centenary.

If Britain votes to leave the EU, Sinn Féin has said a new vote in Northern Ireland on unification would be necessary. If such a vote went the republicans’ way it could destabilise the current mood. A rejection of EU membership would see the two parts of Ireland on different sides of the EU land border potentially putting border controls and customs checks in place, putting a strain on trade and the movement of people.

We asked people in Northern Ireland and Ireland why they support Britain remaining part of the EU, and how Brexit would affect their lives.

Northern Ireland is a small regional economy, often forgotten about in the corridors of power in both London and Dublin. It can often be a quite parochial and insular place at times, but the EU has helped open it up to the world. Northern Irish businesses are now able to trade across Europe, more people from across Europe have settled here and have provided a fresh perspective from the stale old sectarian divisions that Northern Ireland has been cursed with.

We only have a few viable economic options: agri-food, tourism, and foreign direct investment. All of these would be made a lot harder if Northern Ireland exits the EU.

We have been a real net beneficiary of European funding. Billions have been invested in the region in the past 25 years, helping to normalise Northern Ireland as a society and make it a more dynamic place to do business.

I’m deeply concerned about potential political destabilisation that Brexit may bring. The Stormont institutions have only just started to resemble a normal democracy with the development of opposition structures. A Brexit could cause all sorts of political upheavals especially if the status of the border changes.

I’m part of the peace process generation. I was a small child when the Good Friday Agreement was signed. I have no real memories of the violence that plagued Northern Ireland, or any of the controls that used to exist on the Irish border. But I’m deeply concerned about the potential of border controls.

Both my parents’ families are from down south in the Republic, so most of my life has been spent straddling the border. I would regularly cross to see my grandparents and extended family, go to GAA matches, going for shopping trips in Dublin or to simply get cheaper petrol in border villages like Belleek or Blacklion. Currently the border is imperceptible, you only notice it when you see that the road signs have metric units and when you get a text on your phone telling you that you are roaming. The economies of the border counties would be deeply damaged if border controls were put in place.

Primarily, my worries are economic. I’ve already emigrated through lack of a work. My parents run a guesthouse on a ferry port to Wales, and their business relies on a steady flow of free travel. The economy of my home area is pretty weak, and any lessening of travel from the UK or exports would hit it very hard.

Our economy as a whole is fragile, despite the high growth rates posted. I’m worried we could tumble into another recession, and I’m not sure we could handle it.On that note, many of my friends – pretty much all of them actually – have emigrated to the UK for work, and some of my family are planning to do so. If there is a recession in Britain, this could really hurt them too.I’m also concerned about the peace process. I hope that it wouldn’t become destabilised, but I think it is more delicate than people think. Living in Germany, I am unlikely to be seriously directly impacted. But if my family’s economic situation goes south, I’d be the one with the best earnings and I would certainly be sending money home to help out – something I do the odd time at the moment, gladly. If it became more regular it would be a bigger problem.

I’m sad that the UK is where it is with the leave vote, and I hope things can work out.

The European project was begun by those who survived the ravages of world war two, including British and Irish citizens, to create a framework to live together, work together, prosper together and do so peacefully. It is built on the interdependence of our nations, states, societies and cultures.

For Britain to pull closed its shutters on the European family of nations, to not sit at the table setting a basis for a better future would be an extraordinary and monumental reversal for all of us.

It will affect how I can travel to Northern Ireland or Britain to visit friends and family. It will affect my UK citizen friends in Ireland and their free movement around the EU. It will affect how employers in my area can export goods and services to British consumers or purchase goods and services from world-leading British companies. British banks may find it difficult to accept payments through SEPA for example. Will my bank be able to process British bookings easily for me? Will VAT regulations become more difficult on online transactions for me to process?

It will affect fishers in my community who will lose an ally at the Common Fisheries Policy meetings. It will affect numerous British retailers on Irish high streets that I shop at. It will affect NHS access for Irish citizens in Britain like my relations. It will affect access to health services on the equivalent of the NHS in Ireland for UK citizens like my neighbours. It will jeopardise a north-south single energy market – my energy prices may be affected.

There are so many threads between Ireland and the UK that a Brexit has the potential to affect our lives in ways we have no way of anticipating.

A leave result will reduce funding in NI; trigger further resurgence of a ”United Ireland” campaign, destabilising the peace; impact negatively on the environment; increase the local cost of living; disadvantage major industry; and increase local unemployment. On the positive side: nothing.

A leave vote will leave Northern Ireland more isolated and underfunded. Apart from all the other reasons, I do not believe a London government will continue to fund NI, especially given difficulty over border issues. In addition, Scotland is sure to leave the UK sometime soon following a leave vote. That means Northern Ireland will become more expensive and more isolated; a united Ireland won’t be far behind.People who say the UK would be more democratic after a leave vote obviously don’t live in NI, where you never get to choose the UK government whoever you vote for.

Leave campaigners are dealing with utter fantasy. In their imaginary world, Britain will be great again and foreigners will do what they are told and sign trade deals that favour Britain. Exports will soar and the NHS will be overfunded because they will be able to spend the money they save from EU about three times over. Terrorists will leave the country and go to Holland or somewhere, and there will be more days of sunshine and England will win a football match.

I live in Belfast. My lines of communication to the outside world are Ireland and Scotland. Ireland will remain in the EU, and Scotland will probably leave the UK if the UK leaves the EU. So basically, if UK votes to leave, either Northern Ireland joins with Ireland or I’ll have to leave Northern Ireland and move to Dublin, or Cork, or Edinburgh.

If UK leaves EU, the EU will crumble apart. If EU falls, the whole economy of Europe falls, and so will UK’s. If Europe has an economic crisis of such proportions, new far-right and far-left parties will win national elections and destroy the bonds that unite all the Europeans. Furthermore, Russia will take a chance and probably grab more chunks of Ukraine, Moldova, Georgia and Belarus. And the wars in the Middle East will send even more refugees towards Europe, and those refugees, that were promised a safe heaven, will feel cheated and will suffer prejudice towards them. Soon enough it will be cold war all over again, or maybe even worse, world war three.

If we give up on Europe, we give up on ourselves!

