Comparing David Cameron to Neville Chamberlain is insulting – and wrong

2016-06-20

Contact author




ore than 75 years on, there is still no more insulting parallel to be volleyed at a Conservative politician than to be compared with the 1930s prime minister 

In Labour circles, there was for decades no worse insult than to be accused of being a 

Few Tories these days have a good word to say about 

To be compared with Chamberlain is a poisonous insult because of one policy and one policy only. Chamberlain, like his more attractive predecessor Stanley Baldwin, was an appeaser. He wanted to avoid a second European war so soon after the devastating carnage and upheaval caused by the first, in which so many of his contemporaries had died or lost loved ones. That was a widely shared view in the 1930s, an era in which pacifism, for obvious reasons, reached new levels of popularity. But it became an increasingly impossible policy once Adolf Hitler took power in Germany and began a series of territorial demands in central Europe.

In autumn 1938, Chamberlain went to Munich and accepted Hitler’s demands over the Sudetenland area of Czechoslovakia (a country that, like several in Europe, had only come into existence in 1919 after the collapse of the Austro-Hungarian empire). He returned to Croydon airport from Munich 

In the end, the only question, whether in 1938 or 2016 is what is the right policy for Britain in the circumstances

To compare Cameron’s attempt to win public support for Britain remaining in the EU with Chamberlain’s return from Munich is not only insulting – because the Tory party now sees itself as the party of Chamberlain’s great critic and successor Winston Churchill – but also wrong. The EU is neither a dictatorship, nor an armed power bent on war and annexation. It is, as Cameron said in his retort to his studio accuser, a union that a nation can voluntarily join and voluntarily leave. The comparison only makes sense if you believe that Germany is always an enemy – as a motley alliance of Tory rightwingers, the Daily Express, hardcore England football hooligans, permanently traumatised refugees from Nazism and a smattering of war veterans may indeed believe. But Angela Merkel is not Hitler and the EU is an institution of peace not war.

Nor does the charge that Churchill would have denounced UK membership of the EU in the same way that he denounced appeasement stack up. Churchill always thought of Britain as European. He was hugely engaged with European politics. He wanted Britain to be part of Europe, not separate from it. In 1940 he proposed the 

In the end, the only question, whether in 1938, 1940 or 2016 is what is the right policy for Britain in the circumstances. A referendum is a very uncontrollable judge of that big question. Unpopular though Chamberlain always was on the left of British politics, despised as he became as war drew nearer after Munich, never mind his unmentionable role in retrospect, it is a sobering thought that if appeasement had been put to a referendum vote after Munich in 1938, it might well have been overwhelmingly supported.

