EU referendum: vote could go either way, says Jeremy Corbyn – as it happened

2016-06-20

, 







Helen Pidd

The Guardian’s Helen Pidd has filed a dispatch on Nigel Farage’s return to the north-east this evening as he comes to the end of his We Want Our Country Back tour. 

He’s at the Sage in Gateshead: a magnificent silver shimmering building paid for with millions of EU development funding. 

Around 500 people have opted to miss the England match in order to listen to the Ukip leader do one of his final public appearances before Thursday’s referendum.

The event began with Farage observing a minute’s silence in memory of Jo Cox, along with Labour MP Kate Hoey and Tory MP David Davis.

He then returned to the stage to the tune of the Final Countdown and men bellowing “Nigel for PM!” to deliver a riposte to those who have suggested his campaign may have somehow influenced Cox’s murderer, Thomas Mair.

He said: “There are one or two in the Remain camp, their spin doctor [Will Straw] being foremost among them, but also some of their speakers, who have tried to say that the motives of that man were somehow whipped up or inspired by a leave campaign that had fought on a nasty, negative and hateful agenda.

“I want to say: that man, who had his own mental health issues, that man acted in isolation. What that man did was an act of barbarism and every one of us who will go out to vote to Leave condemns utterly what he did.

“Some have tried to demonise me or others to say we’ve upped the rhetoric. Compared to the Scottish referendum we have done no such thing. All we’ve done is ask for sensible, balanced, controlled immigration so that we can have the right number of people to come to our country and benefit our society and we know we can’t do that in the 

Nigel Farage comes on to the Final Countdown in Gateshead as supporters shout "Nigel for PM" 

We’re going to wrap up the blog at this point. Thanks for reading.

Updated





Corbyn said his support for a Remain vote was “not unconditional by any means” and set out a list of problems with the EU. He said: 

I’m opposed to the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, which is being negotiated largely in secret between the 

I’m also opposed to the way in which 

And the way in which systematically big companies are exploiting loopholes in employment laws. So I’m calling for a Europe in solidarity.

But I would also say that if we are to deal with issues like climate change, like environmental issues, you cannot do it within national borders, you can only do it across national borders.

Updated





If you missed it, here’s a clip of Corbyn’s opening statement in that Sky appearance earlier: 

During the appearance, the Labour leader said that the 

Staying part of the 28-member bloc has “implications”, he told audience of young voters on Sky News.

Corbyn, a long-time critic of the EU who voted against membership of the European Economic Community in 1975, has faced accusations that his campaigning for the Remain camp has been lukewarm. He said: 

It’s a big decision. If we stay in Europe there are implications, if we leave 

But, it is also a turning point because if we leave I don’t think there is an easy way back. If we remain, I believe Europe has got to change quite dramatically to something much more democratic, much more accountable and share our wealth and improve our living standards and our working conditions all across the whole continent.




Reviewing Jeremy Corbyn’s performance earlier on Sky, George Eaton of the New Statesman 

Though he noted the economic and social value of the EU (“more than half of our trade”), Corbyn spent much of the programme lambasting its agenda. His support for Remain, he warned, was “not unconditional”.

He attacked TTIP as the “enfranchisement of global corporations at the expense of democratic countries”, and denounced 

Corbyn’s support isn’t for today’s EU but for the “Europe of solidarity” that fellow left-wing leaders have helped persuade him can be achieved. 




A minute’s silence for Jo Cox is being held at a Leave.EU rally in Gateshead, reports Michael Crick of Channel 4 news

Leave.EU rally in Gateshead with Farage, Hoey and David Davis, holds a minute's silence for Jo Cox 

Updated





One of Britain’s largest Unions, the GMB, has said that there are “72 hours to save workers’ rights” as it released a strongly worded statement warning that a range of comments made by pro-Leave politicians suggested that key protections for workers were at risk in the event of a 

Tim Roache, the GMB’s General Secretary, said:

In the past, leading figures from the Leave campaign have said they believe EU legislation that protects workers’ rights is ‘job destroying’. 

Their intentions are absolutely clear. We’ve got just 72 hours to save workers’ rights, by voting to remain in the 

For me it’s an angry remain, I recognise 

Listing a number of comments by leading figures on the Leave side, the GMB said that Michael Gove had described paternity leave as “job destroying” in his column in The Times in 2000, while Boris Johnson had used his column in the Daily Telegraph in 2014 to say that it was time to “root out the nonsense of the social chapter - the working time directive and the atypical work directive and other job-destroying regulations”.

The latest phase of the pro-Remain campaign by the union, which represents 640,000 members, was accompanied by the 

Updated





Rowena Mason

The Guardian’s Rowena Mason 

Arabella Arkwright, a businesswoman who sat on the board and finance committee of Vote Leave, stepped down after the Guardian asked her about a series of tweets and retweets from her account.

Other retweets included a link from Tommy Robinson, the founder of the English Defence League, suggesting UK Muslims were trying to build an Islamic state in Britain.

Another retweet came in response to a Twitter user saying they would never eat tikka masala again if it “got seventh-century barbaric savagery” out of Britain. A reply from Arkwright’s account said: “No to sharia law. By by [sic] tikka masala .”

Updated





The Leave supporting Labour MP, Kate Hoey, tells Sky that the performance was “typical Jeremy” - engaging with an audience in a very agreeable way.

She says that she welcomes the fact that he made it clear that he does not love the EU. 

“I didn’t feel any passion for the EU from him,” she adds

What was more important for her was that, “whatever happens”, Corbyn will still be fighting for the things he believes in as leader of the Labour Party.




Now to reaction to Corbyn’s performance. Toby Young, a Leave supporter, is one of a number of people are picking up on his warning that there would be a “bonfire of regulations”

Corbyn’s “bonfire of workers’ rights” argument shows a lack of faith in the British people. We don’t need the EU to preserve those rights.

On the other hand...

Genuinely think this has been one of Corbyn's best media appearances to date. Measured, thoughtful, engaged with audience. Very good stuff

Back at the Sky event Faisal Islam canvasses opinion from the audience.

“I think he made a passionate case to remain but the most important thing is that he said the EU is not perfect, though the solution is to remain,” says one man, who remains a Remain voter.

An Outer meanwhile wasn’t convinced by Corbyn’s insistence that he’s not a member of the establishment, saying that if the leader of the opposition isn’t part of the establishment then she doesn’t know who is.




There’s time for one last question, which shifts back to more comfortable ground for Corbyn. We’re in the middle of a housing crisis, says the questioner, who asks if being in the EU is “propping up that crisis”.

Corbyn says that the real answer is to chase down the tax avoiders and tax evaders, some of whom are in 

But secondly, says the Labour leader, it’s crucial to challenge the British government on their failure to build social housing and for allowing ‘social cleansing’.

“We can must and will conquer the housing crisis for people who need housing, rather than those who see it as investment opportunities.”




Corbyn says he is not a “lover of the European Union”, but as rational decision believes that it’s better to stay and fight for better regulations when it comes to issues such as environmental protection.

It’s a line which strike Islam as being quite significant - he repeats it back to Corbyn - and may well be one of the more memorable moments from this.

Corbyn follows up in a dialogue with a man in the audience who asks if he will “shoulder the blame” if there is a pro-Brexit vote.

“I am not going to take blame for people’s decisions,” says Corbyn, who says that there will be a decision made on Thursday. He’s hoping that there will be a remain vote but adds that there may well be a Leave vote

“Whatever the result we have got to work with it,” he tells the audience. The man in the audience who who asked that questions says the the Labour leader “doesn’t sound convinced”.

Corbyn insists that he is committed to backing a Remain vote, before adding: “Whatever the result I want to see better working conditions across 

Islam asks: “So it’s immaterial one way or the other?” Corbyn disagrees.




An audience member follows up on the same topic, pleading for restrictions on workers coming into the UK and taking jobs which they are less qualified for than domestic workers.

“If you restrict free movement of labour across Europe then you are defeating the whole point of the common market,” says Corbyn, who suggests that there would possibly be some sort of retribution for British people working in 

Updated





Ryan Scott comes forward with a question: How would his party protect those lower paid Britons who lose out because others are prepared to come and work for much less in the UK?

Corbyn responds: By ensuring that local rates are respected, that the living wage becomes a reality and to ensure that there is lower levels of disparity.

“It’s complicated, not easy,” he says, saying that companies have exploited migrant workers who are here. A higher minimum wage is important, as well as much more controls on the way that companies behave.

Corbyn instances 

It’s moving at a fairly swift pace now so apologies for missing out on a few questions.




A man called Jordan picks up on the checks which Corbyn has talked about, questioning how people are coming into the UK “inside lorries”.

Corbyn tells him that the point applies when people actually apply for refugee status, instancing the example of Afghans who worked as translators in their country and then came to the UK illegally.

He adds: “There’s something strange that is going on at the moment. Hundreds of people have died trying to cross the mediterranean. Has it had headline coverage day after day...? No, it has had minimal coverage.”

That’s claim which, I think, would be 




The questioning has move on to the refugee crisis. Corbyn says he believes that the approach to the crisis by Britain and the EU has been appalling.

“We are not going to solve this crisis with barbed wire and CS gas. What we need is humanity and a political solution in Syria,” the Labour leader tells the audience.

He also attacks the “bigoted response” to 

Corbyn follows up by making the case to remain inside the EU however, saying: “If there was no EU and instead you had 27 member states - would there be any coordinated response.. probably not”

There’s scepticism from a man called Matthew who says there is not adequate checks on the people coming trough with genuine refugees. Corbyn tells him that getting refugee status is very difficult: “The idea that you can just walk into a country and get refugee status is far far from the reality.”

Updated





We’re on to a question now about 

Comfortable ground for Corbyn in some ways, who has put his opposition to the trans atlantic deal on the record very firmly. This is not at odds with his “practical” support for the EU.

He says there is every chance that it will not see the light of day and follows up by saying that he believes that working inside Europe on a market which would continue to allow the UK to trade inside 

“If we came out of the EU, a government led by the main people leading the Leave campaign would sign a TTIP as soon as they could,” he adds, in what is perhaps one of his more effective soundbites so far.

