EU referendum voters wade through water as floods hit south-east

2016-06-23

South-east England faces further thunderstorms overnight after downpours disrupted voting in the EU referendum, flooded homes and caused severe travel delays.

Thousands of commuters were stuck at Waterloo station as trains were either delayed or cancelled because of flooding, with several people tweeting that they would miss the 10pm deadline to cast their ballot. Waterloo is one of London’s busiest stations and many early morning commuters would have waited until Thursday night to vote.

The Rail Delivery Group, which represents train operating companies and Network Rail, blamed the delays at Waterloo on a flood in the Wimbledon area, adding that torrential rain and lightning damage had caused disruption across the south-east. Services at London Cannon Street, another main station, were closed because of signalling failures.

“Torrential rain and lightning damage have caused disruption to the railway across the south-east of England today with delays and cancellations on many routes into London,” said RDG.

Or maybe stuck at Waterloo, watching the crowds, destined to rue my missed vote for evermore pic.twitter.com/QuSeg918iq

A lightning strike to overhead power lines also caused disruption to commuters as trains ground to a halt after losing power.

Thameslink said in a statement: “At approximately 1805 lightning struck the overhead lines just outside of Elstree & Borehamwood, resulting in the power supply tripping which caused the lights to temporarily go out on several trains in the area.”

Even before what some described as “carnage” at Waterloo, torrential rain seeped into polling stations, with one voter in Chessington describing how she had to be carried over the water. Another said she had seen people “rolling up trousers and removing shoes to wade barefoot through dirty water” to vote.

Kingston council, in south-west London, closed one of its Devon Way polling station because of flooding, telling voters to go to the Hook Centre instead. A polling station in Dover experienced a power outage because of the storms and had to run on a generator. A Dover district council spokesman said the outage “did not affect opening” because the generators were turned on in time for the 7am start.

There were concerns that heavy rain could affect turnout, but there were reports of long queues at polling stations despite the downpours. In the rest of the country, especially northern England and southern Scotland, voters enjoyed balmy weather, with sunshine and temperatures up to 20C.

Forecasters said on Thursday that more stormy weather was expected in the south-east later on Thursday.

The violent and thundery showers in the southeast have led to some flooding. Further showers are expected later.https://t.co/sxQVH2XuZn

“Another wave of thunderstorms breaking out across south-eastern UK this afternoon and evening is likely to bring some thunderstorms into the London area,” said the Met Office’s chief forecaster. “Whether these storms are as severe as those of last night is, at this stage, uncertain, but in view of storms being expected during the afternoon and evening, impacts may be as widespread as those of last night and first thing this morning.”

The London Fire Brigade’s 999 office received more than 550 weather-related emergency calls and firefighters attended more than 400 incidents overnight.

In Romford, east London, about 60 homes on either side of Lodge Lane on Penn Gardens and Frinton Road were flooded to a depth of about a metre after the river Rom burst its banks.

Real progress being made in #Romford crews pumping water away from a few houses more here: https://t.co/wtHRVVOOhG pic.twitter.com/5au0WI370R

“We’re using rescue boats to get people safely out of their properties if they want to leave them to go to work or out to vote. We’re also pumping away water and using sandbags to try and prevent more homes from flooding where we can,” the station manager, Rod Vitalis, said from the scene.

Flooding caused widespread disruption for commuters. Network Rail said it had 1,200 engineers working on weather-related issues across the network. The District line, DLR and London Overground were all suspended or delayed because of flooding.

Many of London’s roads were affected by flooding, including the North Circular, which was closed at Waltham Forest. Roads in Battersea in south-west London, Barking in east London and Lewisham were under several inches of water Thursday morning, up to knee height. Water got into ground floor homes in the Longbridge Road area of Barking.

Flooding caused several London Underground stations to close during the morning rush hour, including Embankment, Tooting Broadway, Lambeth North, Borough and Canning Town.

On the rail networks into the capital, Gatwick Express southbound services were suspended, and delays and cancellations meant misery for commuters on South West Trains, Southern and Abellio Greater Anglia services.

Greater Anglia asked customers not to travel into London unless absolutely necessary because flooding of the tracks at Manor Park in east London was causing severe delays and cancellations of services into Liverpool Street from centres including Norwich, Ipswich and Colchester.

#PoorWeatherSouth Video of flooding at Manor Park today. pic.twitter.com/8aMN1I63FY

Southern rail passengers were most severely affected by the flooded line at Wandsworth Common, with disruption likely to continue until the end of services on Thursday night. The network urged customers to start their journey home as early as possible.

Mike, a 24-year-old medical student, said he woke up to power cuts and inches of water in his flat in Canada Water, east London. “Our flat flooded overnight. I woke up to find that my room was covered in two inches of water. The perils of living in a basement flat I guess. I definitely didn’t enjoy spending an hour trying to unclog all the drains before knocking on all the neighbours’ doors to find a sofa to sleep on,” he said.

The Environment Agency issued six flood warnings covering rivers in London and Essex, and about 40 flood alerts across the south-east. Several rivers in the region hit their highest level on record over the past 24 hours. These included the rivers Rom, Wandle, Shuttle at Bexley, Ravensbourne at Bromley, Ingrebourne near Rainham, and Beverley Brook at Wimbledon. The storms gave Surrey, Hampshire and Essex more than 30mm of rain overnight.

