What does this vote mean if one feels utterly powerless in every other way?

2016-06-22

It’s bad timing to lose the phallic firmness of my fellow columnists who are erect with moral certitude about this referendum. They want in. Those who don’t immediately agree are flaccid waverers, ignorant, deluded, possibly racist, immune to facts and often a bit female. You name it and I am it. One of the dreaded 10%, the undecided who will decide this thing. How galling that something monumental should be left in the hands of people who did not make up their minds months ago, who are confused by this utterly false binary we are being asked to vote on: between two different, but actually very similar elites.

I absolutely understand the reasons for voting leave and I have put them over in this paper, which is for remain. My political homelessness is nothing new; indeed, instead of pissing outside the tent, my tent is now ensuite. Obviously, I know Europe is lovely in that “finest wines known to humanity” way, but the EU is a failing and rancid institution of extremely low growth and horrifically high youth unemployment. It is extremely unpopular not just here, but in many of its member states.

Since I wrote about the leave vote being, in its own peculiar way, a protest against globalisation, two things pushed me from leave. Farage revealed his poster and Jo Cox was killed. No, I cannot line up with a man who traffics human misery as bonhomie. Nor can I abstain, as I had considered doing, out of respect for Cox and her incredible family.

I have been hectored for weeks about not being remain. Crossed off friends lists on Facebook? That will show me. Some of those pleas have worked. Friends telling me they have never felt more foreign or frightened. My 15-year-old texting: “Mum, what about working-class immigrants?” The desperate lies of leave. But talking to leave voters outside London, I don’t find them racist scum at all. I find them charming, but lost and deeply uncertain. They are people I recognise – I come from a small town and maybe you never leave it – and it makes me sad to see them dismissed by the liberal elite as somehow evil.

There is a sea of emotions and the undercurrents are strong. “Racism,” scream the peace-loving remainers. Vote love not leave, they say, full of Hallmark sentimentality. They preach tolerance, but show little to their fellow country folk, who they think of as ignorant, uneducated, quasi-facist. Or working class. How are you going to live with them on Friday? Class really is a different country now.

We are many nations: as I supported Scotland’s independence, so I support England’s. I believe the right to self-determination to be a progressive value. This is surely self-evident. But I try to listen.

Once out of the bubble, no one really talks about party politics, but jobs and futures in which every day is the same and there are bleak rundown spaces where there was once life. Nostalgia for what has never been, sometimes. Being locked out of Europe is no threat to many who already feel locked out. Indeed, they may be blaming the wrong group (immigrants), but this feeling is how inequality voices itself. You can condemn it or you can try to understand it.

That is not the current discourse, though. Indeed, the day after the last election, I heard many saying they wanted to strangle any Tory they saw. This polarisation is now even greater. And this post-truth miasma means irrationality rules. Experts know nothing, the vote will be rigged. This kind of paranoia did not develop overnight.

The abandonment by the left of those it should represent means that Corbyn – who appears to have been jumpstarted late in the day – when asked if he would take the blame for a leave vote, said: “I’m not going to take the blame for people’s decisions.” If Peter Mandelson and New Labour were “intensely relaxed” about the rich, Corbyn’s equivalent is being intensely relaxed about losing.

The outpouring of respect shown for Cox was special but, in general, many leavers voice little faith in politicians. Both the mainstream media and social media seem not to see how profoundly alienated so many are. I was appalled that after the big discussion at Wembley, we were taken into the “spin room” where “the narratives” were decided. Here, lots of men in suits agreed the lines. I am appalled that Alastair Campbell is wheeled on to tell us what’s what. When was faith in politicians destroyed? Well, a bit by being lied to about Iraq.

Thus the debate remains dire, but underneath, I sense this undefined devolution. Who are we are as a people? What do we have in common now that we see the divides? What is this country? Who governs it? What does going it alone mean in a joined-up world? Where do we find hope?

So, in the privacy of the ballot box, I will make my mark and I will be thinking about two things: disenfranchisement and division. What does this vote really mean if one feels utterly powerless in every other way?

And I remain guided by the spirit not of so many well-turned and occasionally high-handed editorials that insist I do the right thing, but by the spirit of Tommy Cooper: “I used to be indecisive, but now I am not quite sure.”

