Nazi propagandists v Avengers Assemble, with Gordon Brown as Hulk

2016-06-22

After eight weeks of Faragese and cross-party crack teams, campaigners made their final speeches with the PM being outclassed by his former enemy

Contact author




t the end of the perennially horrifying movie Deliverance, one of the survivors turns to another and says shakily: “I don’t think I’ll see you for a while.” There is no such option for the British public, who have endured – at the hands of both referendum campaigns – eight weeks of what we’ll have to euphemise as unspeakable banjo music. For us, the canoe trip doesn’t end on Friday. As 

Ain’t that the truth. At his own final campaign rally, David Cameron declined to hold back on Boris Johnson and Michael Gove. “Today they were comparing experts to Nazi propagandists!” 

On Wednesday in Birmingham, it was impossible to watch Cameron shout, “Not true!”, “Not true!”, “Not true!”, about things his former close friends have said without wondering: where on earth does trust in politics go now? Après this le déluge. The entire thing has the flavour of a 

Faragese has hung like a psychic pall over much of the campaign, but was at least in abeyance as the prime minister descended on the 

There was Brown, there was Harriet Harman, there was Tim Farron, there was Paddy Ashdown, there was Caroline Lucas ... there wasn’t 

But given that the speeches covered ground from the Somme to Bosnia to the Crimea, it all felt slightly bigger than Farage’s final rallying cry in Westminster had the same morning. Not that I hadn’t enjoyed the Ukip leader’s au courant reminder that Britain is a great sporting nation (footage of beefy Botham from 1981). Farage had again declared of a post-Brexit Ukip, “We’ll act as the canary in the mineshaft” – still failing to get what this metaphor means for the canary. Similarly, his obsession with The Great Escape does not appear to have extended to watching the movie till the end.

And so to 

Still, there’s always 

