What is Brexit and why does it matter? The EU referendum guide for Americans

2016-06-18

On Greek holiday beaches and in remote but pretty French villages this summer British visitors have faced similar questions from anxious fellow citizens of the European Union. A month ago it was: “Your referendum, it will be OK, yes?” But a run of opinion polls showing the campaign to leave ahead of opponents who want to stay in by up to 10%, has forced a change of tone as the 23 June ballot looms. The more reproachful version has become: “Why are you doing this to us?”

Washington’s Capitol Hill legend, Tip O’Neill, once said “all politics is local”. True enough, but rarely the whole truth. The campaign for Brexit – British exit – feeds on decades-old, homegrown resentments. Real or imagined, they include nostalgia for imperial certainties and for pre-globalised jobs for life, plus resentment of immigrants and of rules imposed by “unelected” courts and commissions in Brussels. Such are the demons said to restrain national “sovereignty” or (for some) free market spirits. “ Take back control” is Brexit’s catch-all slogan, designed to appeal to both social isolationists and blue-water buccaneers.

Does that sound familiar? It may well do to jobless Portuguese teenagers, unemployed blue-collar workers in the American Rust Belt and hedge fund managers chafing at “over-regulation”. The visitor to Greece or rural France tries to tell questioners: “It’s bit like Syriza or Golden Dawn,” rival populist insurgencies challenging the status quo in Athens. Or “it’s a bit like your Marine Le Pen or America’s Trump. A lot of people are angry. Some have much to be cross about.”

Industrial unrest amid persistent economic malaise in Europe, the refugee crisis and terrorist attacks have all contributed to a deep and urgent sense of foreboding across the continent. Unseasonal floods and storms have reinforced it. So did the senseless murder of Jo Cox, a popular British MP, in her Yorkshire constituency this week, days after a police officer and his wife were slaughtered in a Paris suburb. And what about that aggressively nationalistic and authoritarian government recently elected in Poland, what does that mean for EU unity?

So the basic reason why British voters may be about to “do it” to their neighbours and sever an uneasy 43-year relationship with the 28-nation European Union (EU) of 500 million citizens is because they are fed up and can show it. Like a ballot proposition in California or one of Switzerland’s frequent referendums (Swiss recently rejected a basic minimum income for all adults), 23 June gives frustrated voters a chance to kick the government, more broadly to kick political elites who are judged to have let them down.

How could that happen in a country whose most charismatic modern leader, Margaret Thatcher, endorsed the view of most respectable politicians with memories of inter-war fascism, calling referendums “a device for dictators and demagogues”? No referendums on Mrs Thatcher’s watch.

But the referendum virus had already infected Britain’s constitutional software. Back in 1975 a divided Labour government had deployed one to legitimize Britain’s recent entry into what was then the “Common Market” of just nine nations. After a token “renegotiation”, prime minister Harold Wilson’s position prevailed by a convincing margin of 2 to 1 and Britain remained part of the club.

At the time Conservative British politicians deplored Wilson’s shortsighted act of domestic party management as dangerous and divisive. Forty years on and for similar reasons of party expediency ahead of Britain’s 2015 general election, the Conservative prime minister, David Cameron, embraced a near-identical strategy. Harried by his irreconcilable Eurosceptic right wing, he finally promised the In/Out referendum on Europe for which they had long clamoured. He even deployed Wilson’s transparent “renegotiation” device, pledging to work out a new relationship for the UK and its European partners within the union.

It was a gamble in every sense. Cameron almost certainly assumed that the pro-EU Liberal Democrats, his coalition partners in governing Britain since Labour lost office in 2010, would still be around to veto such a move in a renewed coalition. But the seismic shift towards nationalism and populism helped decimate the piously internationalist Lib Dems. To his own surprise on 6 May 2015 Cameron found himself with a small overall majority in Britain’s House of Commons.

Restored to Downing St, Cameron could have spun out the timetable he had devised until 2017, as originally indicated. But he seems to have sensed, probably rightly, that the political mood was moving against him. Europe’s tide of war refugees and economic migrants from Africa and the Middle East were stoking economic tensions arising from seven years of recession and austerity budgets. German chancellor Angela Merkel’s generosity (all German families acquired refugee stories in the collapse of 1945) took the main burden of escapees from Syria with decidedly mixed political dividends. But wary Britons felt they had already seen this movie.

More than a million workers from the EU’s “Accession 8” – ex-Soviet bloc countries that joined the union in 2004, notably Poland – had arrived in Britain in search of jobs. That was far more than anticipated, not least because other EU magnet states invoked “transitional” restrictions on what they perceived to be the threat to their workforce from the “Polish plumber”. As the eurozone’s recession deepened and Britain’s more lightly regulated economy recovered they were joined by Spaniards, Italians, even by French professionals and entrepreneurs escaping bureaucracy and leftwing taxes at home. Free movement of goods, services capital and people are the cornerstone of Europe’s single market.

Instead of a lengthy “renegotiation” of Britain’s already semi-detached relationship with the EU, Cameron opted for a quickie in the winter of 2015-16 followed by a rapid campaign towards next Thursday’s date with destiny on 23 June. Germany’s Merkel is keen to keep Britain on board – stable, open market ballast against the Latin block (“Don’t leave us alone with the French,” they say) and seems to like young Cameron, 12 years her junior.

But she has domestic political management worries too, a restless coalition, an election next year and rising Euro-scepticism, something new for the EU’s well-behaved paymaster. She couldn’t help him much, not wishing to encourage either bargain-hunting or resentment from other EU countries. Cameron watered down his demands and got agreement to restrict welfare payments to newcomers, protection for the City of London, Europe’s financial HQ, from EU meddling, a promise that sterling would never be required to join the eurozone it rejected from the start, plus a device to make it slightly easier for member states to keep Brussels regulation away. (“Brussels” is often used in British political discourse in the same contemptuous way many Americans refer to “Washington”.)

It was thin stuff which Cameron’s allies found hard to big up. Not that he has too many. All the main British parties, including Celtic nationalists (except the fiercely British Protestant tribe in Northern Ireland), are pro-EU and campaigning for Remain. But Labour’s leftwing leader, Jeremy Corbyn, a Bernie Sanders without the gravitas or drive, is an old critic of the EU, viewing it as an essentially capitalist vehicle. He is halfheartedly campaigning for Britain to stay in because his MPs will revolt if he doesn’t.

The Scottish National party (SNP) leader and first minister of Scotland, the formidable Nicola Sturgeon, is on the stump too, but warning that, if Britain leaves the EU, Scotland will demand a second independence referendum to leave the 309-year-old United Kingdom. Her party lost the last vote to leave the UK by just ten percentage points in 2014.

That leaves Cameron, George Osborne, his unpopular finance minister or chancellor of the exchequer, plus their charisma-lite cabinet and business allies, to do most of the heavy lifting.

This is the point where the domestic rivers and streams of political loyalty, disaffection and regional grievances – richer south v poorer deindustrialized Rust Belt north or global London v the Rest – flow into the big river of voter discontent across the western world. All western societies are struggling with the economic re-emergence of China and the cultural wars which pit secular liberalism against social conservatism and religious fundamentalism. In Europe they seem more worried by Turkey as a refugee gateway than by the destabilising ambitions of Vladimir Putin, which contribute to refugee flight in Syria.

The poisonous word that unites all those grievances is “elite”. But here too Britain’s experience is part of a wider current, despite parochial assertions to exceptionalist circumstances. It is part of a wider paradox too. Facing David Cameron, Eton and Oxford-educated child of upper-middle-class privilege, and his well-heeled metropolitan network, on the other side of the referendum campaign are very similar people. The Vote Leave campaign and its less reputable sidekick, Leave EU, which has less scruple about playing the immigration card, are financed by hedge fund managers and gamblers, literal and metaphorical, people whose own lives will not be much damaged if a win for Brexit delivers the recession and worse that Cameron predicts. At their head is Boris Johnson, tousle-headed blond Tory MP and former mayor of London, also Eton and Oxford, fellow ex-member of the university’s Skull and Bones-style Bullingdon Club. He is anti-elitist in the way George W Bush was.

The difference is that Cameron’s smooth PR skills make him look a dull dog by comparison. Johnson has the Houdini knack of escaping from his own mistakes (calling Barack Obama “half-Kenyan” sparked recent controversy) and follies (the EU is Hitlerism by other means, he has said), and is as vague as Ronald Reagan, as personally lax as Bill Clinton, and as charming in a very British way as either. He makes people laugh, a priceless asset. Even though everyone knows he wavered between Leave and Remain and opted for the path he felt would benefit his personal ambition, he is the two campaigns’ “most trusted” politician. Win or lose, he could soon get Cameron’s job, many pundits predict.

It has been a sour and dispiriting campaign on both sides. Cameron and Osborne have tried to frighten voters with a flood of scary official predictions about the economic cost of Brexit in terms of jobs, investment, interest rates, exports, public spending, and the house prices so dear to Britons’ hearts. There would have to be an emergency budget if markets panic, Osborne warned last week.

Brexiteers deride such stuff as Project Fear, but have their own slew of figures to show how much money would be freed up by the return of Britain’s £8bn a year contribution to EU funds, a figure much disputed and already spent many times over by the Leave campaign. Experts in every field from City giants and economists to university researchers and public health officials, are overwhelmingly for Remain. Barack Obama said it as clearly as he decently can.

But who needs experts in a populist era? “The people of this country have had enough of experts,” said the prime minister’s personal friend and justice secretary, Michael Gove – now one of five cabinet members ranged against the PM and campaigning for Brexit – in one of many bad-tempered TV debates. As Remain’s economic case was trumped by Leave’s use of the immigration card, both sides called each other liars. These Conservative politicians are men and women who will, in theory, reunite behind their own prime minister whatever the referendum outcome.

No wonder Brexit MPs who hate Cameron predict he will not last until Christmas. Australians may feel they have the most raucous politics, Brazilians may deplore their presidential scandal, and sensitive Americans hang their heads in sheer embarrassment over the billionaire braggart and buffoon that is Candidate Trump. But Brits are having a pretty crude year too, one in which rich men campaign against “elites” for the votes of the poor but angry, who have the most to lose. Newspapers which supported EU membership in 1975 are mostly on the other side in 2016, partisan even by Fleet Street’s mendacious standards. Often owned by wealthy men not much UK-resident for tax purposes too, incidentally.

Sensible people try to point out that most speculation about what will happen if Britain votes for Brexit is just that. Will the Europeans punish London for its desertion, or does the EU need British markets too much to dare, as insouciant Brexiteers insist? Will Britain have to leave the single market for goods and services in favour of a looser Canadian-style free trade deal rather than the Norwegian EU treaty, one of several offered by Leave campaigners who do not seem to share a map? Norway’s deal requires free movement of people, anathema to Brexit’s blue-collar foot soldiers who compete with newcomers for jobs and healthcare.

What abour Nato and other already fragile international institutions ? Or the City of London’s envied status? What about that unruly refugee camp at Calais where the French police help keep desperate young men from getting to Britain through the Channel Tunnel in smugglers’ lorries? Will Paris still cooperate or wash its hands of Britain and its lax work and benefit rules? Britain will boom, says Leave. Quite the reverse, warns Remain.

No one knows for sure and expert opinion is not what it was. Leave or Remain, many British voters seem to be drifting towards a decision more casually than they watch football’s Euro 2016 tournament in France, from which English hooligans may succeed in Brexiting their national team as a punishment for their disorder. As in much else the symbolism is obvious to everyone except the miscreants. Strange then that this week’s dreadful murder of Jo Cox, an impressive MP with a bright future and a young family, by a loner with apparent far-right links, jolted the dystopian nightmare just enough to let voices be heard asking: “Is this who we are, is this our future, can’t we rise above all this?” Five days to go.

Michael White is a former political editor and Washington correspondent of the Guardian.

