Paused EU referendum debate to resume, but with a more respectful tone

2016-06-18

Campaigns on hold following death of Jo Cox amid calls for more respectful tone in final days before vote




The 

With just days left before the referendum on Britain’s future in the 

Both campaigns were immediately suspended in the aftermath of the attack on Cox, and Jeremy Corbyn and David Cameron made an 

But campaigners are acutely conscious that there is little time left to convince the public of their cause in the historic vote, and a poll released on Saturday morning showed the remain campaign had pulled ahead on the final weekend.

The UK-wide BMG telephone poll for the Herald put support for remain at 46% and backing for leave on 43%, with 11% undecided or unwilling to say. Excluding this group, 52% were in favour of staying in the EU, with 48% backing 

Scores of events up and down the country had been cancelled since Thursday; but a full schedule of appearances by senior campaign figures on the political television shows on Sunday morning, including Corbyn and Michael Gove on the BBC’s Marr on Sunday, is planned to go ahead, though they are expected to strike a markedly less combative tone.

A senior spokesman for Vote Leave, which has cancelled a rally in Birmingham on Saturday but is expected to go ahead with an event in London on Sunday, said: “There’s a democratic process, but we have to reflect the mood of the country as well, so it’s striking that balance.”

He said it would be the wrong response to the attacks to make subjects such as immigration taboo. “You can’t start thinking that you don’t talk about some things: the central subject of the debate is the same,” he said, adding however that the tone might be less “brash” – with a planned event involving 

Sadiq Khan and other senior politicians have pleaded for a 

Khan will appear at the BBC’s EU referendum debate at Wembley arena on Tuesday opposite Boris Johnson. A spokeswoman for the BBC said the debate will be proceeding as planned, with thousands of people expected to attend.

In a striking intervention on Friday, the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, also 

Both party leaders, and their counterparts on the leave side, will have to tread extremely carefully to avoid accusations that they are using Cox’s death to further their political aims. Cameron and Corbyn have so far limited their political remarks to calls for democracy to be protected, but former Labour prime minister 

Politicians have avoided drawing any public conclusions about the impact of the killing on the referendum outcome, but aides acknowledge it could affect the psychology of voters and are grappling with how best to proceed. There has been no suggestion of postponing the vote, because that would require new legislation.

Britain Stronger In 

Labour’s own remain camp also said it was suspending all activity until Monday, with sources saying they were reviewing all campaign material to make sure there were no personal attacks or inappropriate language.

Ukip called off a countrywide tour with its battlebus until at least Monday.

After 

, the Labour MP for Aberavon and a friend of his counterpart for Batley and Spen, said there was a need to “change the tone forever and reflect on what Jo stood for her whole life”. Anna Turley, the Labour MP for Redcar, said it was time for a more respectful tone in political discourse. Anna Soubry, a business minister, said it would be time to “reset the dial on political debate, comment and discourse” after the referendum.

Others, however, were concerned that political debate had become so toxic that it might take a long time to change. Mike Gapes, the 

