The EU referendum is a battle of the press versus democracy

2016-06-17

Contact author




he parallels between 

Yet if Cameron is forced to resign as prime minister after losing the 

Of course, like Cameron’s putative collapse next week, MacDonald’s fall in October 1924 had many other causes. The precise role of the Daily Mail among them is much debated by historians. But it was the Mail that, four days before the 1924 general election, published the so-called 

To say that today’s Daily Mail relies on forgeries in its long attempt to drive Britain out of the EU, in which Cameron’s fall would be more than just collateral damage if it happens, would be false. Nor would the Mail’s campaign be the sole reason for a Brexit vote. But to say that the 

No newspaper in this country’s history has more consistently, and at times more rabidly, pursued political objectives than the Mail – from war with Germany in the early 20th century, 

There’s another consistent and important thread in the Mail’s long political story too. The Mail is a newspaper that wants power. The Mail is a player not an observer, today as in the past. It was the campaign against Stanley Baldwin’s leadership of the Tory party by Lord Rothermere’s Mail and Lord Beaverbrook’s Express in 1931 that triggered Baldwin’s famous onslaught about the proprietors aiming at power – “

I looked up Baldwin’s great speech this week when the Mail, unlike almost every other newspaper, 

Baldwin would have understood what was happening, just as Cameron presumably does. The EU referendum is indisputably an important question facing Britain. But it is also the chosen arena for a power battle between sections of the press and the elected prime minister. It is, in one perspective, the long-sought culmination of the British press’s desire to assert its power over mere politicians. That is why, in my view, the referendum next week is not simply about the question on the ballot paper about Britain and Europe. It is also about whether democratic politics or the press shall be master in our public affairs.

Europe has long been the press’s chosen battleground for this contest. It is hard to read the Mail’s front page of 4 February, with its headline 

Speak out it unquestionably has, as the relegation of the Orlando story illustrates.

Others have done the same, abandoning all pretence of reporting in favour of editorialising, as the Sun’s full-on 

Five years ago Cameron 

The referendum is, in one sense, the press’s revenge for Leveson. Next week they may get their man, if Cameron falls. A vote to leave the EU would mean many things. But it would show where too much power still lies in this country. It lies not with parliament, not with democracy, not with social media, but still with a few over-mighty newspapers whose stock in trade, exactly as Baldwin said 85 years ago, is made up of falsehood, misrepresentation and half-truths.

Remain or leave? Politics or the press? The question on Thursday, just as Humpty Dumpty said, is which is to be master.

 This article was amended on 20 June 2016 to remove a “not” from the sentence, “It is hard not to read the Mail’s front page of 4 February, with its headline ‘Who will speak for England?’ in any other way.”

