Poles in UK fear EU debate has led to a backlash against migrants – survey

2016-06-19

In a major survey of the Polish community living in Britain, most say they would vote Remain if they could, but are nervous about a rise in negative attitudes

 and Jakub Krupa




The looming possibility of 

Amid wider concern that the referendum debate has unleashed ugly feelings towards migrants and others, the research reveals that 40% of Poles in Britain are concerned about a potential increase in negative attitudes towards migrants after Brexit.

The survey – carried out between 15 and 17 June among 5,878 Polish citizens living in the UK, and released to the 

A majority of those polled – 79.4% – believe the UK should remain in the EU, with 16.5% saying they would vote Leave if they could. Most (83%) also see their long-term future in the UK but have concerns about the consequences of Brexit.

If the vote does go that way, 47.4% still want to remain in the UK, and 26.2% will try to stay in the UK but return to 

The online survey, carried out by the Polish pollster IBRiS, also confounds stereotypes. The changes to benefits access that were negotiated earlier this year by David Cameron are viewed positively by most Poles, with 29.1% saying they were “definitely good” and 39% “rather good”.

However, one of the most striking aspects of the research is the evidence of unease that the referendum has generated.

Marcin Duma, chief executive of IBRiS, said: “Our respondents declare that ahead of the decisive vote they feel mostly negative emotions – fear [11%] and uncertainty [62%], which can be linked with the fact that as many as 83% see their future as the Queen’s subjects The percentage of those who would like to return to Poland is minimal [3%].

“Our research also reveals that Poles living in the UK are concerned about a potential increase in negative attitudes towards migrants following a Brexit vote [39.2%]. While they feel personally accepted in the UK [72.7% net positive], they feel that Poles as a national group are much less welcome [34.6%].

“Regardless of the result of the vote, Poles living in the UK feel integrated with the British society and want to stay in the country, thinking of it as their home. Contrary to the media narrative, access to benefits is not their key concern, as almost 94% of them are in permanent employment or education.”

Anne White, professor of Polish Studies at UCL, said: “This survey’s results indicate that Polish migrants have a very clear idea of their future in Britain, and they want to be heard in the national debate.

“When many academics started doing research on Poles in the UK in the aftermath of the 2004 accession, a strategy of ‘intentional unpredictability’, many people kept their options open in their answers. Now we see families settling in the UK, having children, stabilising their life.” 

