Politicians’ pact with the electorate lies shattered – trust has gone

2016-06-19

The division between what politicians say and how citizens live their lives has deeply damaged democracy




ight from the outset, the 

The youngest person eligible to vote in the 1975 referendum is now nearly 60. In that time, for too many, the pact with the electorate that work is rewarded by fair pay, just redistribution, decent housing and long-term security has been destroyed. Protection for the working man and woman has been stripped away and trade unions battered while the dominance of profit and the price tag has desperately undermined vocation and fraternity as industry and finance have been deregulated. At the same time, the neoliberal “truth” that “free” markets rectify themselves has proved, instead, to be a licence for unmitigated greed on a scale encapsulated by the BHS debacle.

The 

When 

Yet when employment minister 

How this division between what some politicians say and how citizens live manifests itself most clearly in the communities that have been pathologised as working-class bigots, starved of resources and work, and have witnessed the stealing of their citizens’ right to be heeded. These are Ukip’s “left behind” who are most likely to experience the arrival of a concentration of immigrants in numbers and impact that most, but not all, politicians fail to acknowledge. The top 10% have no experience of living in a neighbourhood reshaped by the arrival of immigrants, often positively, but sometimes not as pressures on services increase with spending cuts.

We need immigration, we need to manage it better and invest more. In 

So, which way to vote? The dilemma is plump with paradoxes, not least that pro-EU politicians even in this campaign have failed to extol the advantages that the union has brought because doublespeak has become such a habit. Last month, for instance, the TUC published 

Sovereignty is the cry, but it ought to be survival – for the ordinary man and woman. Out of the EU, the multinational corporations that truly rule will have little opposition; the few strands of legislation that offer protection to us citizens will be shredded. Remain isn’t much of an option but, given a very strong dose of democratisation, as the former Greek minister Yanis Varoufakis advocates, it hands David a sling against the Goliath of avaricious global capitalism and, perhaps, a future.

