Ireland’s economy has turned around, and support is firmly back behind the EU

2016-06-17

Multinational companies remain our engine of wealth creation. But no one here labours under the illusion that they are here for the small domestic market

 




Ireland was the poor man of north-west Europe for almost all of the 20th century. Peripherality, isolationism and policy mistakes mired the country in relative poverty and stagnation. Few facts show better than employment how so little changed over so long. 

Then everything changed. In the 1990s the Irish economy exploded into life. After a decades-long stagnation, employment almost doubled in just a dozen years. In terms of income per person, as gauged by the (admittedly imperfect) GDP measure, 

The period of belated catchup was intimately related to Europeanisation and globalisation, and the interaction between the two. The creation of a single market in Europe in the 1990s was exploited by Ireland like no other country. The luring of globalising companies from across the world who sought to locate in the planet’s biggest market was the greatest economic policy success in independent Ireland’s history. Their enormous presence remains the economy’s most important engine for wealth generation today, accounting for up to 

Then the 

No one is under any illusion as to why they come and why they stay. They are not in Ireland for the small domestic market of 4.5 million people. They are here for the 500 million-person market that sprawls eastward all the way to Poland’s border with Ukraine.

The centrality of European market access to Irish prosperity is reflected in public and elite opinion. There are very few voices challenging the overwhelming consensus that EU membership has been good for Ireland and the view that the country’s economic model is founded on being fully integrated into the economy of the rest of the EU is close to being universally held.

The latest EU-wide opinion poll showed that we Irish had the third most positive view of the union among its 28 members

Illustrative of how just how important the EU is for Irish prosperity is the absence of anyone arguing that Ireland should follow Britain out of the EU, if that is what UK voters decide. That Ireland followed Britain into 

But despite the widely recognised importance of the EU economically, and plenty of Brussels’ cash (mostly to farmers) over the decades, attitudes towards Europe cooled as the age of austerity dawned. That is almost entirely to do with eurozone membership.

After the 

But the outbreak of the Greek crisis less than 18 months later marked a shift, for Ireland as well as Europe. Instead of protecting its members, the euro became the perfect transmission mechanism for contagion. In November 2010 Ireland became the second eurozone country 

It should be said that Ireland’s woes were overwhelmingly self-inflicted. A huge property bubble in the years up to 2008 was not controlled. Hubris had set in. The government of the time came to believe the economy was invulnerable. But none of this is to say that the response to the eurozone crisis was the right one, either for the bloc as a whole or for individual members. The most controversial single issue was the European Central Bank’s (ECB) role in rescuing Ireland’s banks.

Elected politicians in Dublin acted of their own volition in using taxpayers’ money to pay private bank debts, but not in every case. Two separate Irish governments deemed it worth allowing a small portion of the liabilities to be defaulted on. The ECB, worried about another shock to an already fragile European financial system, took a different view. That added about €4bn to public debt. Whether Frankfurt was right or wrong, for a largely unaccountable entity to impose private debts on a sovereign people has left a bitter taste.

However, these controversies are being left behind as Ireland’s economy has recovered strongly – employment has risen by more 

The latest EU-wide 

