EU referendum: the countdown to the big vote

2016-06-18

How the long campaign unfolded since David Cameron’s 2013 promise of an in/out vote on Britain’s European Union membership




In a long-trailed speech – the wait is compared to Tantric sex – 

The Tories’ surprise election win leaves him with no wriggle room. Cameron will have to deliver on his pledge to put the question to Britain before the end of 2017. After some shenanigans in parliament, especially over attempts by the House of Lords to lower the voting age to 16, the pledge is made law.

The prime minister clocks up the air miles as he shuttles between European capitals trying to secure allies for his renegotiation and find out what the EU’s other 27 leaders might be willing to sign up to. While he makes progress on some of his ambitions, he meets too much resistance to introducing curbs on freedom of movement to be able to push the idea.

In a bid to manage the pressure building within his party, 

After round-the-clock negotiations in Brussels, Cameron announces that he has got the 27 other member states to agree a deal that includes a British opt-out from “ever closer union”, protection for the City from eurozone decisions and a four-year ban on in-work benefits for new arrivals. He says this will make Britain “better and stronger” in a “reformed Europe”. Outers say it amounts to diddly-squat. Both sides agree that the country must now make a once-in-a-generation decision.

The cabinet has a rare Saturday morning meeting. The inners and outers around the table piously agree that it should be a good, clean fight. Six of their number then declare for Brexit – and it almost immediately becomes a nasty, dirty fight. 

The Bank of England governor, Mark Carney, makes the first of several interventions, cautioning that 

Barack Obama enters the debate, urging Britain to stay with the EU because it is a triumph for “British values” of democracy and open markets. He adds a warning that the UK would be at the “back of the queue” for a trade deal with the US if it left. Outers reply with their now familiar cry that no one who disagrees has the right to express an opinion. Johnson disparages the president on the grounds that he is “half-Kenyan”.

The outers do what Nigel Farage had always told them to do: they go big on immigration, gambling that they can use fears about migration to trump voter anxieties about the economic risks of Brexit. 

Appeals to unregistered voters to sign up are followed by a surge of last-minute applications too large for the government website to cope with. Parliament scrambles to pass 

, the shadow cabinet and a chorus of union leaders urge a vote for remain amid fears that the campaign has been far too dominated by blue-on-blue slanging matches and that a chunk of the Labour vote is sliding towards leave. To the frustration of remain strategists, the Labour leader and his deputy, Tom Watson, differ on how to address immigration.

The horrific murder of talented and admired 

