Remain in EU, say former UK security and intelligence chiefs

2016-06-20

Economists can argue forever – or neverendum, as the saying goes now. What is extraordinary is the breadth and depth of the arguments over the pros and cons of EU membership - even entering the realm of spooks.

Former security and intelligence chiefs (who make it clear they are speaking for serving officers) are warning that leaving the EU would hinder their work protecting Britain. It is as if Brexiteers, including some senior ministers, are dismissing offhand warnings from MI5 and MI6.

“I do know”, said Nigel Inkster, a former director of MI6, “that the intelligence community places enormous value on exchanges” with intelligence agencies of other EU countries, notably over information on suspected terrorists or violent extremists.

In the event of Brexit, “I do know the intelligence community would be concerned”, he stressed. Existing EU agreements on sharing datesets would have to be renegotiated on a bilateral basis, he said.

He acknowledged that European countries would share vital intelligence in the event of a major security threat. However, Inkster warned: “You cannot predict which of the allies have a crucial [piece of information]”.

There are some in Brussels who want the EU to develop a common intelligence-gathering service, as well as a “European Army” (see below). They will not happen. Security and intelligence-gathering is the jealously-guarded preserve of national governments. Pooling of information - yes. Abandoning national control - no.

What the EU can provide is what Inkster called “a backcloth of intelligence and security functions”.

Sir David Omand, Whitehall’s former chief security and intelligence coordinator, pointed out that after the terrorist attacks in Paris in November, the British government had agreed actually to step up cooperation in the EU by signing up to the Prüm Convention - sometimes called Schengen III –covering data exchanges on DNA and vehicle registrations.

Inkster was speaking at the launch of an edition of Survival, the journal of the International Institute for Strategic Studies where he is director for Future Conflict and Cyber Security.

He also warned that Brexit would “exacerbate existing faultlines” in Northern Ireland.

François Heisbourg, chair of the IISS and board member of respected French and German thinktanks, referring to a recent edition of the influential German magazine Der Spiegel, suggested Brexit could thrust Germany into a leadership role for which it had no appetite – and where Germany would become too small for the world and too big for Europe.

And the EU would become more dysfunctional providing Moscow with an opportunity to exploit for its own ends.

The former head of MI5, Lady Manningham-Buller, has said the country’s security would be seriously undermined by leaving.

The former head of MI6, Sir John Sawers, has told the Daily Telegraph readers why as a “lifelong patriot”, he will vote Remain. His predecessor, Sir John Scarlett, told readers of the Times Britain should stay in the EU.

(Scarlett’s predecessor, Sir Richard Dearlove, head of MI6 in the run up to the 2003 invasion of Iraq, has said he is in favour of Brexit, not least because it would allow the UK to “dump” the European Convention on Human Rights. Yet the ECHR is not an EU institution - and what message would that give to Vladimir Putin and increasingly aggressive nationalist groups throughout Europe?)

The former chief of defence staff, Lord Guthrie, told the Telegraph that he would now vote for Brexit because he is worried about the prospect of a “European Army”. But he must know there is no chance of the kind of supranational institution he seems to be worried about.

The EU’s attempts to develop even a most general “European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP) has been in the doldrums for years, as Heisbourg pointed out.

Guthrie warned of the danger of “duplication” with the EU trying to rival Nato. It could never do that. And there is duplication now with European countries wasting money building competing models of tanks, aircraft, armoured cars, ships.

Duplication is contributing to the kind of inefficient European armed forces that the US - and both Obama and Trump - complain about.

Nato commanders, as well as the US president, urge Britain to stay in the EU. A message that, curiously, has not convinced two British defence ministers Penny Mordaunt and Julian Brazier.

