EU referendum: David Cameron on BBC's Question Time EU Special - as it happened

2016-06-19

Here are the main points from David Cameron’s appearance on Question Time.

I’ve got four days to go. I want to do better at getting this argument across.

If we choose to leave, we can leave but let’s be clear if we do leave we are walking out the door, we are quitting, we are giving up on this organisation which even if we leave will have a huge effect on our lives, our children, on our opportunities, on our businesses.

I don’t think Britain at the end is a quitter. I think we stay and fight. That is what we should do. That is what made our country great and that’s how it will be great in the future.

At my office I sit two yards away from the Cabinet room where Winston Churchill decided in May 1940 to fight on against Hitler – the best and greatest decision anyone has made in our country.

He didn’t want to be alone, he wanted to be fighting with the French and with the Poles and with the others but he didn’t quit. He didn’t quit on Europe, he didn’t quit on European democracy, he didn’t quit on European freedom.

We want to fight for those things today. You can’t win, you can’t fight, if you are not in the room. You can’t win a football match if you are not on the pitch.

I’m not going to be prime minister in three decades’ time. If this was going to happen in the next couple of years I would not support it, but it is not going to.

But he said there was no need to give a cast-iron promise to veto Turkey joining because it was not going to happen for decades. Accusing leave of not telling the truth about this, he said:

I think this is the biggest red herring in this whole referendum debate. I can’t find a single expert anywhere in the country or in Europe that thinks that Turkey is going to join in the next three decades ...

I feel strongly about this. People are getting through their letter boxes leaflets from leave saying basically Turkey is going to join the EU – not true.

But he also said that it was in Britain’s interests to encourage Turkey to think it could join the EU eventually because Britain wanted it to be “Western-facing”.

I think the most important thing for the politicians is to remember what [Cox] was all about, which was service, community, tolerance. These are values we should all try to live by and promote, in order to remember her.

I don’t think we know why exactly this happened or what the motivation was and we have to wait for the police investigation before we do that.

But I think what we do know is wherever we see intolerance, hatred, division, we should try and drive it out of our communities, out of our public life.

We have to be careful that debates can be passionate but we have to make sure that they are not based on those things.

I do believe it’s irreversible if we vote to leave, I don’t think there’s any prospect of rejoining.

If we were trying to rejoin we would have to join the single currency, we would have to join the Schengen no-borders zone, give up the British rebate - so I would see no prospect of us rejoining. This is a final decision.

You can’t jump out of the aeroplane and then try to scramble back into the cockpit.

I think the terrorists that want to do us harm want the west to be divided. They don’t want Britain and France and Belgium and Germany to work together to defeat terrorism. They’d like to see us separate from each other.

That’s all from me for tonight.

Thanks for the comments.

Here is the verdict from the Guardian’s panel on Cameron’s Question Time performance. There are contributions from Polly Toynbee, Anne Perkins and Matthew d’Ancona.

And, just to be pedantic, David Cameron is wrong about Winston Churchill taking the key decision for Britain to fight on alone against Hitler on 28 May 1940 in the cabinet room at No 10. (See 7.18pm.) The key cabinet meeting took place in the House of Commons.

Boris Johnson writes about it rather well here, in an extract from his Churchill biography.

And here is one of the cabinet minutes.

@AndrewSparrow Yes, 28th May meeting took place at HoC: pic.twitter.com/i8rDKP3rxn

Here is the statement from Vote Leave’s chief executive, Matthew Elliott, on David Cameron’s performance on Question Time.

David Cameron repeatedly refused to say that he would veto Turkey joining the EU. That’s because - in his own words - he is the “strongest possible advocate” of Turkey joining. He has said before that he is “angry” that it is taking too long for Turkey to join. The EU has recently accelerated talks with Turkey with David Cameron’s support and UK taxpayers are sending £1bn to Turkey to help them join. You cannot trust Cameron on Turkey.

Cameron had no answers to people’s legitimate concerns on immigration tonight and failed to set out how he would meet his manifesto pledge to bring the numbers back down to the tens of thousands while remaining in the EU. He had no answer on how we would fund the NHS to cope with higher levels of immigration.

He has avoided speaking to the British public throughout the campaign because he knows that they do not believe him anymore on the EU. It showed tonight as he was openly mocked by the audience. If you don’t believe Cameron’s spin and want to take back control you need to Vote Leave on Thursday.

And this is what political journalists and commentators are saying about David Cameron’s performance on Twitter.

It’s quite mixed, although generally people are quite positive about Cameron’s Churchill outburst, and they seem to think he was better towards the end.

From the Daily Mirror’s Jason Beattie

Snap verdict on Cameron's #bbcqt grilling: he saw the nation he has divided: https://t.co/Rs1sPaybNA pic.twitter.com/vktr1cKaqo

From the Spectator’s James Forsyth

If IN win when the subject is the economy and Leave win when the subject is immigration, this isn't the night Cameron would have wanted

Cameron fired up from the Chamberlain comparison onwards, but far more focus on immigration than IN would have liked in that Question Time

From the Sun’s Tom Newton Dunn

That #bbcqt was Cameron's best TV performance of #EUref. Finally some fire in his belly, though it took Chamberlain comparison to ignite it.

From the BBC’s Andrew Neil

Isn't the 1940 Churchill didn't quit against the Nazis analogy a bit of a stretch?

From the Sun’s Harry Cole

Comparison to Chamberlain was like a light switch for PM. 0 to 60 in one rehearsed Churchill anecdote.

From the New Statesman’s George Eaton

Cameron suddenly shifted gears halfway through. Passion has worked better for him. #bbcqt

Cameron's net migration target one of his biggest mistakes - bad policy, bad politics. #bbcqt

From the Economist’s Jeremy Cliffe

Hard to watch Cameron on #bbcqt and not conclude that the fundamental divide of British politics is now open-closed rather than left-right.

From the Spectator’s Fraser Nelson

If Cameron's face colour is a gauge, then this #bbcqt isn't going well at all for him. He's between pink and crimson.

Given hostility of questions, Cameron did well - gave as good as he got. His WW2 response sounded great (until you thought about it). #bbcqt

From STV’s Harry Smith

#bbcqt can't help feeling Cameron is running on autopilot. His heart is not in it. The audience don't like him. The format is not his friend

Cameron is arguing much better now; sometimes he only wake up when his back is against the wall

From the Sun’s Steve Hawkes

Much stronger end to the BBCQT from the PM - Don't think he can be in any doubt about Brits' concerns about immigration after this campaign

From Timothy Garton Ash

Cameron excellent on #bbcqt but after won referendum immigration questions still to answer #Remain #RemainINEU #Brexit

From Robert Harris

As I heard it there were only two cheers during @bbcquestiontime and both were for PM rather than his hostile questioners

From the Sun on Sunday’s David Wooding

Many in audience at #bbcqt don't seem to believe David Cameron's insistence that HE will Remain if WE vote Leave.

From Sky’s Faisal Islam

Powerful moment for PM as Brexiteer accuses EU of dictatorship/ Chamberlain letter - and Cameron fights back quoting Churchill- gets cheers

PM in trouble on migration target predictably, but landed message on irreversible econ risk -which matters most to voters will settle #euref

Here is the Britain Stronger in Europe spin on David Cameron’s performance. This is from the briefing they have sent out:

Tonight the PM set out a strong and clear case why we are stronger, safer, and better off staying in the EU.

He set out how:

- Leaving the EU is an irreversible decision. There is no turning back. Don’t risk your family’s future.

- It will hit people’s livelihoods and lead to a decade of uncertainty.

- We need to be in the room to fight Britain’s corner when the big decisions are being made.

- For a strong NHS and strong public services we need a strong economy – and for a strong economy we need to be part of the world’s biggest market. That’s why the chief executive of the NHS, the Royal College of Physicians and the Royal College of Midwives all say we are better off staying in the EU.

- Experts – including nine out of 10 economists – are clear that leaving the EU would wreck our economy, and put jobs on the line. If a mechanic told you not to drive your car because your brakes were faulty, and the engine was leaking oil, you wouldn’t drive it on the motorway.

- He spelt out why we are safer and stronger when we work together with other countries to fight terrorism and stand up to Putin.

- He reiterated that this is a crucial vote for young people. There will be more jobs and opportunities for our children and grandchildren if we stay in the EU.

- He was clear - if you don’t know, don’t risk it.

Cameron on Question Time - Snap verdict: The last 24 hours have been relatively good for remain, but that felt like a setback.

When Cameron did a similar Q&A with members of the public for Sky News two weeks ago the questions he attracted were probably more hostile (although also more focused on his record as prime minister generally), but there were moments when it felt as if he was actually winning the argument, and changing minds. Today, although he was as slick and fluent as ever, he sounded like a man mostly failing to persuade. Remain win comfortably on the economy, and Cameron’s line about not getting in a car if the mechanic says no works well. But on immigration he found it virtually impossible to defend his “cutting it to below 100,000” target (or ambition as it now is), and he was utterly spatchcocked when David Dimbleby put it to him that, contrary to what he was claiming, there was a silver bullet to immigration: leaving the EU. Cameron’s problem is that, although he instinctively supports the free market case for immigration (“We’ve got to just live with high immigration because it is good for growth”), which is a defensible intellectual position, he has instead spent years trying to pretend that EU, growth-enhancing free movement is somehow compatible with a 100,000 limit, which is is indefensible. Tonight it showed.

He was on equally tricky ground on Turkey. Cameron came closer than he has before to saying he would veto Turkey joining the EU if the decision came up while he was prime minister, and he actually made a good argument as to why it was in Britain’s interests to make Turkey think that long-term membership is a possibility. (See 7.22pm.) But his refusal to give a clear commitment to using the veto sounded weaselly.

Cameron’s line about people not being convinced yet by his arguments because they were “confused” (see 7.01pm) just sounded patronising. And there was little he said in the section about whether he could remain as prime minister if Britain voted for Brexit that would persuade anyone he honestly thinks he can survive for long in those circumstances.

Mostly Cameron sounded a bit underpowered. He came alive most when challenged by the angry man who accused him of being a modern-day Chamberlain, and he responded with his mini-oration about Churchill and the non-quitting spirit of May 1940 that led Churchill to decide to carry on fighting Hitler instead of suing of peace. It was rousing stuff. But it was also somewhat inappropriate; Britain faced a threat to its very survival in 1940, which it does not face now. Not even Jeremy Corbyn thinks the combination of Brexit and Boris would be as disastrous as a Wehrmacht invasion. One version of Godwin’s law has it that whoever mentions Hitler first in an argument has lost. Alternatively, you could say that whoever needs to summon the spirit of Churchill when it is not called for has lost too.

Q: Isn’t this deal on the table just a starting point?

Cameron agrees. If we stay, we can work for further reform. If we leave, it is over.

And we have a special status, he says.

And that’s it. I will post a snap summary shortly.

Q: Why do we have to keep subsidising poorer EU countries through our contributions, when we could be using that money here?

Cameron says the EU budget is going down.

And there would be no savings from leaving. All the experts say we would lose from leaving.

Q: Young people want to remain in the EU. Would it be fair if their future is determined by other people voting to leave?

Cameron says he hopes people will vote to remain.

Cameron says leaving the EU would mean going back to austerity.

Q: Stuart Rose said wages would go up if we left.

Cameron says most experts say the economy would suffer.

Q: So why did Rose say that?

Cameron says what he said is more complicated than that.

David Dimbleby reads out the Rose quote.

Cameron says Rose went on to say other things.

He says he does not want to see jobs move to the continent.

Q: Will you veto the accession of Turkey?

Cameron says it is not going to happen for decades, so that is a red herring. He cannot find any expert who thinks it will join in the next three decades. He says that to join, Turkey would have to close 35 renegotiation chapters. It has closed one. This is completely untrue.

Q: You said you would support Turkish membership. Would you block it?

Cameron says it is not going to happen in the next few decades.

Q: But do you support it?

Cameron says if it happened in the next two years, he would not support it. But it is not going to happen for decades. It is a red herring.

He says Britain is in favour of Turkish membership in principle because we want it to be a Western-facing country. We want it to respect human rights, and stop locking up journalists. That is not going well, he says.

Q: Your EU renegotiation can be overturned. But you are like Neville Chamberlain, waving a piece of paper. The EU dictatorship can overrule you.

Cameron says 27 other EU leaders have backed him.

He says they know we can quit. But he does not think Britain is a quitter.

He says he sits two yards away from the cabinet room where Winston Churchill decided to carry on fighting in World War Two. He did not quit. And we should not quit either. You cannot win a football match if you are not on the pitch, he says.

Cameron says if EU migrants cannot get work, they have to go home. The freedom of movement to work is not an unqualified right.

Many members of the audience protest, indicating they do not accept what he is saying.

