If you think the UK will be in control after Brexit, dream on

2016-06-17




lmost everyone agrees that the EU is not working well. It is also true that on almost any scenario, whether we are in or out, this region will remain our biggest and closest market. Whether it thrives or not is, or should be, of fundamental interest to us. All that matters is whether it thrives more or less by the UK being out or in.

For some, the only way to reform the EU is to 

The alternative view is that the UK could, and should, play its full role as a key leader in reforming the EU. Those who favour exit argue that EU reform is near impossible, but they ignore the following: the UK has achieved change (eg Thatcher’s rebate on the budget, Major’s opt-out from the euro, Blair keeping us out of 

Don’t let’s sell ourselves short. We should not underestimate how much our leadership, inside the EU, can make this massive region, right next door to us, work better, for us all.

I totally understand the general cynicism about economists’ predictions. I am on the side of those who argue that we have massively overclaimed what we know and have also pretended that economics is an objective science when actually it is shot through with value-laden assumptions. However, though we may not know much, we do know that any increase in uncertainty hits investment.

Following 

Following Brexit, the likes of Tata, Nissan, Honda and Unilever will face a relatively greater incentive to make their new investments not in the UK but in mainland Europe. They are in the UK now because as an EU member we are a gateway to the 500-million-people EU market. Outside, for firms from abroad, we become a cul-de-sac. This is not just a guess. The chief executives of several major businesses are saying so. And, as less capital investment comes in, so the pound will fall, import prices will rise, and everyone on a wage or pension will be worse off.

What happens because of, and beyond, this short-term economic hit, is a matter of professional judgment. Mine is that the “mess” is likely to run far wider than economics.

Perhaps the sunny uplands will arrive quickly and peacefully. Personally, I doubt even the existence of the uplands. But, uplands or not, there is a big economic ditch in the way.

I recognise the anger that is venting itself on immigration. However, the loss of jobs and the downward pressure on the wages of the low skilled is more the result of international trade than it is of immigration (eg cheap coal in China is a main cause of the demise of the steelworks in Port Talbot).

Yes, there are indeed communities where job prospects are poor, where getting a GP appointment feels impossible, where schools are overcrowded and cheap housing non-existent. These communities need help with planning and resources. But, on average, migrants pay more in taxes than they take in housing, social services, education or health.

With the imposition of austerity since 2010, public services are under pressure, entirely separately from the demands of migrants. One of the more unedifying aspects of this campaign is observing Michael Gove and Boris Johnson, both members of a government that has been imposing cuts in public services, having the gall to blame this on immigration.

At the start of the campaign, the issue that worried me most was the increasing loss of control to Brussels and the European court of justice. Pooled sovereignty sounds fine, but where does the real power lie and what would happen post-Brexit? But consider the current arrangements. All decisions by the Council of Ministers – the supreme executive body in the EU – on matters concerning the treaties of the EU require unanimity. Thus, on many of the really big issues, such as the admission of Turkey, Britain can exercise a veto. This is a massive protection. And even where there is qualified majority voting, EU records show that Britain has been outvoted in only 2% of cases since 1999. No situation except complete 

What about the claim that 60% of UK law comes from Europe? Research by the House of Commons library concluded that the figure lies anywhere between 15% and 53%. But as already indicated, even where the law is initiated within the EU, the vast majority is with our prior agreement.

If the vote is to remain, the UK has a wholly new platform from which to lead the debate for reform

In 2014 the supreme court judge Lord Reed addressed the question of the European court of justice. The court he describes is a far cry from the all-powerful supremo that is frequently claimed. It has “to rely on national courts to secure the effective implementation of EU law”, and there is a “collaborative rather than a hierarchical or competitive relationship between national apex courts and the court of justice”. There is no sense of the UK supreme court being pushed around or of great conflicts.

There could be a deep disagreement between parliament and an EU court. But it was parliament that passed the 1972 European Communities Act. What parliament has passed, parliament can repeal. This is our ultimate backstop.

But the purpose of a backstop is precisely that – only to be used as a last resort. To argue that because a deep conflict might arise in the future we should exit the EU now, is akin to a married person choosing to be divorced today purely because the need for a divorce might arise in 10 years’ time. Few marriages would survive such logic!

Now consider a post-Brexit world, in which we are supposedly “in control”. But this assumes everyone wants to trade and make political arrangements with us entirely on our terms. It’s a fantasy.

There is the real possibility of Scotland demanding another vote to leave the UK. John Major and Tony Blair, appearing together, warned that a vote to leave the EU would “jeopardise the unity” of the UK. So the “we” might become merely England and Wales.

At this point we enter the territory of who do we think we are and who do we want to be. The part of this debate that most puzzles me is the number of those favouring Brexit who claim their heart dominates their head. If your heart is about a deep sense of loyalty and commitment to the values and ideas the UK has stood for over centuries, I am entirely with you. But if your heart is telling you to risk the breakup of the kingdom, think what your Queen might tell you about where your true loyalties and commitments should lie.

