Ruth Davidson was the star at Wembley. Can’t we have more politicians like her?

2016-06-22

Along with Nicola Sturgeon and Kezia Dugdale, the Scottish Tory leader is so normal and competent that she puts her colleagues south of the border to shame

 




he Scottish Tory leader, Ruth Davidson, was the star striker of the 

It is no surprise to anyone who has watched 

During the 2015 general election campaign she posed for photographs 

Davidson’s a far cry from the Bullingdon Club posh boys who’ve done so much to turn people off the Conservative party. She’s a gay kickboxer from Selkirk, a former local journalist and Sunday school teacher whose dad was a mill manager.

Davidson was inspired to join politics not by a lust for power or an accident of birth but when, in the wake of the 2009 expenses scandal, David Cameron called for people who had never been political before to get more involved.

Her 

Davidson, along with the SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon and Labour’s 

Political life has to include ruthless game-playing, strategies that make your eyes water and the sort of decisions that none of us would fancy making. You have to be able to choose whether to close a library or build a roundabout, fund new knees at the expense of fixing kidneys, campaign alongside Cameron or snub him. And the more disengaged people become from politics, the more likely it is that the person making those choices is someone who doesn’t think it’s difficult – who quite genuinely finds changing other people’s lives for better or worse the kind of thing that doesn’t keep them awake at night.

Nobody’s perfect, but personally I’d far rather the sort of person working on that sort of thing were one who comes across like a normal human being. It’s easier to forgive them when they get it wrong and easier to trust them to make the right decision nine times out of 10.

And it’s a beautiful Catch-22, if you like, that the more normal and unpolitician-like a politician is, the more they engage us in the issues that they wrestle with, and thus the more they seem one of us.

Davidson has the best of Boris Johnson – an ability to appeal to voters across the board – without his waffle or sense of entitlement. She’s able to go toe-to-toe with Sturgeon and has overseen a resurgence in Tory fortunes north of the border. She’d probably petrify Nigel Farage, which would be a good thing to see.

It’s just a shame that we can’t stage a cross-border raid and grab her, Sturgeon and Dugdale for our own.

