John Barnes hits back at Gove over remarks about EU referendum

2016-06-21

John Barnes has said comments he made about the EU referendum were “misinterpreted” by Michael Gove, who claimed the former England footballer backed the campaign for Brexit.

The sportsman hit back after the justice secretary counted him among celebrity leave supporters in an interview on Sky News.

“I was surprised when I got a text from my son saying Mr Gove has said that I support the leave campaign,” said Barnes. “How this happened is that I gave an interview stating that for English footballers it would be better off being out of the EU, because of course we couldn’t get all of these European players as easily. So it would be better for English footballers.”

But Barnes said he was actually in favour of remain, and had made that clear to Vote Leave campaigners.

“That was then misinterpreted as I am supporting the leave campaign. I got a phone call the very next day, this is about a month ago, saying thank you very much for your support, and I made it categorically clear, speaking from the point of view of English footballers, it will be better off,” he said.

“ I think about what is right for the country. I made it plain that I do not support them. I support remain. And they said thank you very much, we won’t be contacting you again. That’s why I’m very surprised to hear my name being called in terms of supporting the leave campaign.”

The comments came after former Manchester United and England players, David Beckham and Rio Ferdinand, also came out as in supporters.

Beckham reflected on his days at Old Trafford, arguing that his team had been helped by a Danish goalkeeper, Peter Schmeichel, the leadership of an Irishman, Roy Keane, and the skill of France’s Eric Cantona.

Beckham spoke of how welcome he had been in other European countries, adding: “We live in a vibrant and connected world where together as a people we are strong. For our children and their children, we should be facing the problems of the world together and not alone.

“For these reasons I am voting to remain.”

Ferdinand wrote an article in the Evening Standard saying he was motivated to vote for the first time.

“It’s about the sort of country our kids are going to grow up in and how the rest of the world will look at Britain from now on. And from all I’ve heard I think the decision we make could take us to very different places,” he said.

“I’ve got a unique perspective on this. I’ve seen racism in football and I’ve spoken out about the racism my family and I experienced. But in this campaign, to tell you the truth, I haven’t liked what I’ve seen. I think the focus on immigration has been a shame. I think there’s a danger that, if leave wins, it’ll be an endorsement of the idea that it’s OK to blame all our problems on foreigners,” he wrote.

